source: https://arxiv.org/html/2210.05675
arxiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.05675
note: HTML dump via w3m; not a PDF.
========================================================================

Report GitHub Issue

×
Title: [                    ]

Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:

Description: [                    ]
Submit without GitHub Submit in GitHub
[smileybone] arXiv is now an independent nonprofit! Learn more ×
arXiv logo Back to arXiv
Why HTML? Report Issue Back to Abstract Download PDF   

 1. Abstract
 2. 1 Introduction
 3. 2 Experimental Design
 4. 3 Results
     1. 3.1 Trained-from-scratch transformers
         1. Generalization from in-weights information is rule-based.
         2. Generalization from in-context information is exemplar-based.
     2. 3.2 Pretrained language models
         1. In language models, generalization from in-context information is partially rule-based.
         2. Smaller models are less rule-based.
     3. 3.3 In-context generalization can be made more rule-based with pre-training.
 5. 4 Conclusions
 6. References
 7. A Experiment details: Trained-from-scratch transformers
     1. A.1 Subvector stimuli
     2. A.2 Pretraining for few-shot learning
     3. A.3 Evaluating inductive biases
     4. A.4 Pretraining for rule-based generalization
     5. A.5 Architecture, training, and evaluation details
 8. B Experiment details: Large language model experiments

License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2210.05675v2 [cs.CL] 13 Oct 2022

Transformers generalize differently
from information stored in context vs weights

Stephanie C.Y. Chan ^†^†thanks: Equal contributions Affiliation: DeepMind    Ishita Dasgupta^1^1
footnotemark: 1 Affiliation: DeepMind    Junkyung Kim Affiliation: DeepMind    Dharshan Kumaran 
Affiliation: DeepMind    Andrew K. Lampinen Affiliation: DeepMind    Felix Hill Affiliation: 
DeepMind

Abstract

Transformer models can use two fundamentally different kinds of information: information stored in
weights during training, and information provided “in-context” at inference time. In this work, we
show that transformers exhibit different inductive biases in how they represent and generalize from
the information in these two sources. In particular, we characterize whether they generalize via
parsimonious rules (rule-based generalization) or via direct comparison with observed examples (
exemplar-based generalization). This is of important practical consequence, as it informs whether
to encode information in weights or in context, depending on how we want models to use that
information. In transformers trained on controlled stimuli, we find that generalization from
weights is more rule-based whereas generalization from context is largely exemplar-based. In
contrast, we find that in transformers pre-trained on natural language, in-context learning is
significantly rule-based, with larger models showing more rule-basedness. We hypothesise that
rule-based generalization from in-context information might be an emergent consequence of
large-scale training on language, which has sparse rule-like structure. Using controlled stimuli,
we verify that transformers pretrained on data containing sparse rule-like structure exhibit more
rule-based generalization.


(a) Partial exposure test.


(b) Rule-based.


(c) Exemplar-based.


Figure 1: Partial exposure test for differentiating rule-based vs exemplar-based generalization.
Stimuli have two features. The model sees three combinations (AX, AW, and BW) in training or in
context (depending on experiment), and is evaluated on a held-out (test) combination BX. (1(b)) A
rule-based model uses a parsimonious decision boundary that explains the data (here, based only on
Feature 1), classifying the test as o. (1(c)) An exemplar-based model computes the similarity
between test and training examples using all features. Since BX is equally similar to AX and BW, it
is equally likely to classify it as * or o.

1 Introduction

Transformer-based architectures have an impressive ability to use both information stored in
weights during training (“in-weights learning”), and information stored only in the inputs provided
at inference time (without any gradient updates to the weights of the model; “in-context learning”)
(Chan et al., 2022). In-context learning on pretrained models enables learning efficiently from a
few examples (“few-shot learning") (Brown et al., 2020), or even efficiently compressing a large
dataset (“prompt tuning") (Li and Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2022). Given the
evident current and future potential for this new learning paradigm, it is important and useful to
understand its inductive biases, especially how it differs from in-weights learning.

One way to understand inductive bias is by examining how models generalize to held-out data. In
this work, we adapt the experimental paradigm in Dasgupta et al. (2022) that pose a classification
task that distinguishes between two previously defined kinds of generalization behaviors (see 1). A
“rule-based” decision is made on the basis of minimal features that support the category boundary (
Ashby and Townsend, 1986), while an “exemplar-based” decision generalizes on the basis of
similarity to examples from training data (Shepard and Chang, 1963), invoking many or all features
available.

This distinction is particularly interesting when comparing in-weights vs in-context learning.
Exemplar-based generalization (that uses all available features) is useful in a low-data regime
where there is not enough information to form an abstract sparse rule (Feldman, 2020). On the other
hand, sparser rule-based generalization may help avoid sensitivity to spurious correlation when
training with large, noisy, naturalistic datasets (that are commonly used to train in-weights
learning).

We find that transformers exhibit a striking difference in their generalization from in-context vs
in-weights information. Transformers display a strong inductive bias towards exemplar-based
generalization from in-context information. In contrast, transformers display a strong inductive
bias towards rule-based generalization from in-weights information.

However, when we pose a similar task to large transformer models pretrained on language, they
exhibit stronger rule-based generalization from in-context information. One interpretation of these
results is that the distribution of natural language is more compatible with rule-based
generalization from context (rule-based generalization is in fact optimal in compositional domains
like langauge (Arjovsky et al., 2019)), and such patterns might present strong enough learning
pressure to overcome – and even reverse – transformers’ inherent bias towards exemplar-based
generalization from context.

2 Experimental Design

We adapted the “partial exposure” paradigm from Dasgupta et al. (2022) where each stimulus has two
features; only one of the features predicts the label. We evaluate how the model generalizes to a
held-out combination (using sparse rules or similarity to exemplars), see Fig 1.

First, we explored generalization in transformers trained on controlled synthetic data, where we
can examine generalization from both in-weights and in-context information and directly compare
them. Second, we repeat this experiment on pretrained language models and characterize their
in-context generalization. Finally, we compare the patterns observed and invesigate factors that
explain the differences observed.

3 Results

3.1 Trained-from-scratch transformers


(a) From in-weights.


(b) From in-context; few-shot training.


(c) From in-context; rule-based training.


Figure 2: Generalization patterns of transformer models trained on synthetic data: frequency of
various model outputs when presented with the held-out stimulus of the partial exposure paradigm
(Fig 1). (2(a)) Generalization from weights is completely rule-based. (2(b)) In contrast,
generalization from context is exemplar-based. (2(c)) The exemplar-based bias in in-context
learning can be overcome by pretraining the model on sequences that explicitly require rule-based
generalization.

For the trained-from-scratch transformers, we passed sequences of stimulus-label pairs as inputs to
the transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017). The sequences consisted of two parts: a context (24
tokens; i.e. 12 stimulus-label pairs) and a query (stimulus). The model was trained to minimize a
softmax cross-entropy loss on the prediction for the final (query) stimulus. Each stimulus consists
of two subvectors concatenated together into a single token (Fig 4(c)) – these subvectors comprise
the two features of the partial exposure paradigm. See Appendix A for further details.

Generalization from in-weights information is rule-based.

To investigate generalization from in-weights information, we trained the model on partial exposure
data, and evaluated on the held-out combination. During training, the label for each stimulus class
was fixed, so that the stimulus-label mappings were stored in weights. The context tokens are
uninformative for the query. After training, we measured the model’s biases by evaluating on the
held-out class combination. See Appendix Fig 4(d) for details. When trained and evaluated in this
way, transformers displayed fully rule-based generalization (Fig 2(a)), i.e. based on a sparse rule
that only took the first feature into account.

Generalization from in-context information is exemplar-based.

To investigate generalization from in-context information, we first pretrained the model for
few-shot in-context learning (see A.2 for more details), i.e. to refer to information provided
in-context when making a query prediction. Importantly, pretraining for few-shot learning imparts
no bias towards either rule-based or exemplar-based generalization, because either is an equally
valid strategy for solving the few-shot problems. Then we evaluated the model on partial exposure
sequences. See Appendix Fig 4(b) for example sequences used for training and evaluation. When
trained and evaluated in this way, transformers displayed totally exemplar-based generalization, in
striking contrast to the rule-based generalization that was observed from weights. That is, when
queried on the held-out combination BX, the models were equally likely to output the labels
associated with either AX and BW (Fig 2(b)), indicating that they are comparing the query directly
(and along all features) to examples that were shown in context.

3.2 Pretrained language models

Do these patterns hold when evaluating on pretrained language models, arguably the most-used
transformer-based model at the moment? We used a large (70B parameters) pre-trained language model
(LM) trained for autoregressive language prediction on large-scale web data (Hoffmann et al., 2022
). To investigate in-context generalization in this model, we use the same “partial exposure”
experimental paradigm, but instead using shape and color words as the two features comprising the
stimuli, and nonsense words for the labels (see Fig 5 for an example). We take the completion
generated by the LM as the predicted query label.

With the synthetic data, we could ensure no a priori bias towards any feature; we have no such
guarantee here. We account for any possible bias toward generalizing along a specific feature with
a control condition from (Dasgupta et al., 2022) where neither feature is more predictive in the
training data, so the model must use pure exemplar-based generalization. Performance in this
condition is now used as the baseline for pure exemplar-based generalization, and deviation from
this baseline is the measure for rule-based generalization. See Appendix B for further details. We
don’t investigate in-weights generalization in these models, since that would require manipulation
and control of the training data and large-scale re-training.

In language models, generalization from in-context information is partially rule-based.

First, in the control condition where the model is forced to use exemplar-based generalization, we
find that the language model prefers generalizing along the color dimension rather than the shape
dimension (Fig 3(a)). Since bias towards shape gives better classification performance on
naturalistic visual stimuli (Landau et al., 1988; Geirhos et al., 2018), it is interesting that we
see the opposite bias in a system trained on naturalistic text data; future work should look into
possible explanations (e.g. the “pragmatic” nature of language; Degen et al. (2019)). The LM
predominantly produces one of the two labels provided in context, but does sometimes produce an
unseen word (‘other’ in Fig 3). The LM produces an unseen word more frequently when the query is
also unseen in-context (not reported), suggesting a mutual exclusivity bias (Gandhi and Lake, 2020
), also worth future investigation.

To measure the degree of rule-based generalization, we compared each partial exposure result to the
respective control: for instance, we compared the probability of generalizing along color in the
color predictive partial exposure evaluation condition (Fig 3(c)) vs in the control condition. If a
model uses pure exemplar-based generalization, there will be no difference in the classification
pattern between the partial exposure and the control conditions. Alternatively, rule-based
generalization predicts an increased sensitivity to the predictive feature dimension (either shape
or color) compared to control. Here, we found evidence of rule-based generalization for both color
and shape. This is still in contrast with the purely exemplar-based in-context generalization we
saw in our synthetic experiment.


(a) Baseline feature bias.
Refer to caption


(b) Shape predictive.
Refer to caption


(c) Color predictive.
Refer to caption


(d) Effect of model size.


Figure 3: Generalization from in-context information in a pretrained LM. We classify LM responses
by whether it gives the label consistent with generalizing along color, shape, or neither. (3(a))
Measuring feature-level bias with the Control condition; the model prefers to generalize along
color. We use these results as baselines for the partial exposure conditions. (3(b)) When a sparse
rule-based decision boundary supports shape as predictive, the model classifies along shape more
often than in the baseline control (dotted line). (3(b)) Similarly when color is predictive, the
model classifies along color more often than in the baseline control (dotted line). (3(d)) Smaller
LMs are less rule-based.

Smaller models are less rule-based.

We investigate this further by evaluating language models of different sizes. We measure
‘rule-ness’ as how much more likely the model is the generalize along the predictive feature (as
supported by a sparse rule) in the partial exposure condition, compared to the corresponding
(model-specific) control condition. This corresponds to the difference between the purple bar and
dotted control in Figs 2 and 3. We find that smaller models (1B and 7B parameters) are steadily
less rule-based, with the 1B model effectively performing exact exemplar-based generalization –
similar to those trained from scratch (Fig 3(d), further details in Appendix 6).

3.3 In-context generalization can be made more rule-based with pre-training.

We did not observe the same effect of scale in transformers that were trained from scratch on
synthetic data – increasing number of layers, number of attention heads, and number of classes did
not lead to more rule-basedness. This may be because we were not able to achieve the necessary
scale with those experiments or due to synergistic effects between scale and the type of training
data.

To evaluate the role of training data, we evaluated in-context generalization on a transformer
trained on synthetic stimuli where the query explicitly required rule-based classification (more
details in Appendix A.4). With this training data, the transformer learns rule-based generalization
to held-out sequences 2(c). Thus, while transformers exhibit inherent bias towards exemplar-based
generalization from context, when trained on data that ecnourages rule-based generalization from
context, they can learn to do so. This supports the interpretation that pretrained language model
show rule-based generalization because natural language contains implicitly rule-based data, but
crucially, this structure only seems to be picked up and used by larger models.

4 Conclusions

We found distinct patterns of generalization when transformers generalize from information stored
in weights vs in context. When trained on synthetic data, generalization from in-weights
information is completely rule-based, whereas generalization from in-context information is almost
entirely exemplar-based. However, a pre-trained language model is surprisingly rule-based when
generalizing from in-context information, and this is increasingly true for larger models. We find
that it is indeed possible to induce rule-based generalization from in-context information by
pretraining a transformer on an explicitly rule-based classification problem. Together, these
findings support the possibility that natural language data (perhaps because of its combinatorial
nature) provides a strong learning pressure towards rule-like generalization, which works in
concert with model scale.

References

  • Arjovsky et al. [2019] Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. 
    Invariant risk minimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
  • Ashby and Townsend [1986] F. Gregory Ashby and James T. Townsend. Varieties of perceptual
    independence. Psychological Review, 93:154–179, 1986. ISSN 1939-1471. doi: 10.1037/
    0033-295X.93.2.154. Place: US Publisher: American Psychological Association.
  • Brown et al. [2020] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan,
    Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini
    Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
    Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
    Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish,
    Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. 
    arXiv:2005.14165 [cs], July 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165. arXiv: 2005.14165.
  • Chan et al. [2022] Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew K. Lampinen, Jane X. Wang,
    Aaditya Singh, Pierre H. Richemond, Jay McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data Distributional
    Properties Drive Emergent In-Context Learning in Transformers, May 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/
    abs/2205.05055. arXiv:2205.05055 [cs].
  • Dasgupta et al. [2022] Ishita Dasgupta, Erin Grant, and Tom Griffiths. Distinguishing rule and
    exemplar-based generalization in learning systems. In Proceedings of the 39th International
    Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4816–4830. PMLR, June 2022. URL https://
    proceedings.mlr.press/v162/dasgupta22b.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
  • Degen et al. [2019] Judith Degen, Robert D. Hawkins, Caroline Graf, Elisa Kreiss, and Noah D.
    Goodman. When redundancy is useful: A Bayesian approach to ’overinformative’ referring
    expressions, December 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.08237. arXiv:1903.08237 [cs].
  • Feldman [2020] Vitaly Feldman. Does learning require memorization? a short tale about a long
    tail. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages
    954–959, 2020.
  • Gandhi and Lake [2020] Kanishk Gandhi and Brenden M Lake. Mutual exclusivity as a challenge for
    deep neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:14182–14192, 2020.
  • Geirhos et al. [2018] Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge,
    Felix A Wichmann, and Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture;
    increasing shape bias improves accuracy and robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12231, 2018.
  • Hoffmann et al. [2022] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya,
    Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan
    Clark, Tom Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc,
    Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and
    L. Sifre. Training compute-optimal large language models. ArXiv, abs/2203.15556, 2022.
  • Landau et al. [1988] Barbara Landau, Linda B Smith, and Susan S Jones. The importance of shape
    in early lexical learning. Cognitive development, 3(3):299–321, 1988.
  • Lester et al. [2021] Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The Power of Scale for
    Parameter-Efficient Prompt Tuning, September 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08691. 
    arXiv:2104.08691 [cs].
  • Li and Liang [2021] Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-Tuning: Optimizing Continuous Prompts
    for Generation. arXiv:2101.00190 [cs], January 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.00190. 
    arXiv: 2101.00190.
  • Shepard and Chang [1963] Roger N. Shepard and Jih-Jie Chang. Stimulus generalization in the
    learning of classifications. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65:94–102, 1963. ISSN
    0022-1015. doi: 10.1037/h0043732. Place: US Publisher: American Psychological Association.
  • Sun et al. [2022] Tianxiang Sun, Yunfan Shao, Hong Qian, Xuanjing Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. 
    Black-Box Tuning for Language-Model-as-a-Service. In Proceedings of the 39th International
    Conference on Machine Learning, pages 20841–20855. PMLR, June 2022. URL https://
    proceedings.mlr.press/v162/sun22e.html. ISSN: 2640-3498.
  • Vaswani et al. [2017] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
    Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All you Need. arXiv:1706.03762
    [cs], page 11, 2017.

Appendix A Experiment details: Trained-from-scratch transformers


(a) Transformer inputs and outputs.


(b) Example sequences: Evaluating generalization from context.


(c) Stimulus examples.


(d) Example sequences: Evaluating generalization from weights.


Figure 4: (4(a)) Sequences of alternating stimuli and labels are passed to a transformer. Each
sequence consists of a “context” (12 stimulus-label pairs) and a “query” stimulus. The model is
trained to minimize the loss on the query prediction. (4(b)) To evaluate generalization from
context, the model is first pretrained to perform in-context learning by training on few-shot
sequences; stimulus classes and labels are randomly chosen for every sequence, so that the model
must perform few-shot learning from context. Inductive biases are evaluated on “partial exposure”
sequences, where one combination is held out for evaluation (“BX"). Consistent selection of the
label associated with “B" indicates a rule-based bias, while equal selection of the labels
associated with “A" and “B" indicates an exemplar-based bias (since “BX" is equally similar to “AX"
and “BW"). (4(c)) Each stimulus consists of two subvectors concatenated together into a single
token. Each subvector belongs a particular class, and each class is characterized by a different
centroid. The subvectors are sampled from a multivariate normal centered on that centroid. The
subvectors have length 32, but here we only show 4 values. (4(d)) To evaluate generalization from
weights, the model is instead trained directly on partial exposure data, and inductive biases are
evaluated on the held-out combination. (The context consisted of random samplings of the stimulus
classes, and were irrelevant to the query prediction.)

A.1 Subvector stimuli

Each subvector belongs a particular “subvector class”, and each subvector class is characterized by
a different centroid. The subvectors are sampled from a multivariate normal centered on that
centroid. A “stimulus class” is the concatenation of two subvector classes, and a stimulus is a
sampling from a stimulus class. Example stimuli are shown in Fig 4. This design is a 64-dimensional
generalization of the 2-D classification example from Dasgupta et al. [2022], and ensures that
there is no a priori bias towards one feature or another.

Number of features per stimulus: 2 | Feature length: 32 | Number of classes per feature: 10 |
Number of values per class: 100 | Covariance scaling on the per-class normal distributions: 0.1

A.2 Pretraining for few-shot learning

To pretrain the model for in-context learning, we pretrained the model on few-shot (4-shot 3-way)
sequences, i.e. sequences for which the context consisted of 3 different stimulus classes each
repeated 4 times, and where the query class was one of those 3 classes. The classes and labels were
randomly assigned for each sequence.

A.3 Evaluating inductive biases

Models were trained and evaluated as shown in Figs 4(b) and 4(d).

An additional label ("2", in the example in Fig 4(b)) and corresponding examples were included in
the partial exposure sequences, to ensure that if the model is equally likely to select the labels
associated with "A" and "B", it is because of those examples’ similarity to the query stimulus,
rather than because the model is selecting labels at chance. This was similarly done for training
on partial exposure data in weights (not shown in Fig 4(d)).

Note also that the BW stimulus was shown twice as often as other stimuli in the partial exposure
data, as was done in Dasgupta et al. [2022], in order to ensure that there is no bias induced by
having one label more frequent than another. We also ran experiments where BW was not repeated, and
the pattern of results was the same.

A.4 Pretraining for rule-based generalization

To pretrain the model for rule-based generalization, we used the partial exposure sequences shown
in 4(b), but for training as well as for evaluation. In training, the label for the query BX was
always the same as the label associated with BW in context (note that the stimuli and labels are
randomly assigned, so that BX could be manifested as any of the stimulus classes, and the query
label could be any of [0, 1, 2].)

A.5 Architecture, training, and evaluation details

Num layers: 12 | Embedding size: 64 | Optimizer: Adam | Batch size: 32 | Learning rate schedule:
Linear warmup and square root decay, described as min(3e-4 / 4000 * global_step, power(4000, 0.5) *
3e-4 * power(global_step, -0.5))

For each experiment, we ran 16 TPUv3 cores and 4 v100 GPU cores for 200,000 training steps.

Models are evaluated on evaluation data throughout training, and bar plots in Fig 2 show evaluation
outputs averaged over the last half of training (100k-200k steps). Error bars indicate 1.96
standard errors across 10 training runs (there is zero variance for the results in Figs 2(a) and 2
(c)).

Appendix B Experiment details: Large language model experiments

See Fig 5 for example evaluation sequences.

In order to account for potential low-level word-order effects, we evaluated on four different
formats for the stimuli (‘red circle’, ‘a circle that is red’, ‘an object that is circular and
red’, ‘an object that is red and circular’). We found no significant differences in qualitative
patterns across the different word orderings, so we report the average across all four formats in
our results.


Figure 5: To evaluate generalization from context in a pretrained language model, the model is
evaluated on partial exposure sequences where the features are instead text features (shape and
color words). The control condition allows us to evaluate the model’s baseline bias towards shape
or color.

We also include more detailed information about the experiments using different model sizes in Fig
6. These show the raw performances (including model-specific controls) on all model sizes and
feature sets.


(a) Control condition.


(b) Shape predictive.


(c) Color predictive.


Figure 6: Results on the pretrained language models for different sizes.

Experimental support, please view the build logs for errors. Generated by L A T E xml [LOGO] .

Instructions for reporting errors

We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility
and mobile support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and
rendering, choose any of the methods listed below:

  • Click the "Report Issue" ( ) button, located in the page header.

Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.

Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and
reporting rendering errors we may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML
versions for all readers, because disability should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank
you for your continued support in championing open access for all.

Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML
maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.

We gratefully acknowledge support from our major funders, member institutions, , and all
contributors.
About · Help · Contact · Subscribe · Copyright · Privacy · Accessibility · Operational Status
(opens in new tab)
Major funding support from
Simons Foundation Simons Foundation International Schmidt Sciences
 
