source: https://arxiv.org/html/2305.11206
arxiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11206
note: HTML dump via w3m; not a PDF.
========================================================================

Report GitHub Issue

×
Title: [                    ]

Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:

Description: [                    ]
Submit without GitHub Submit in GitHub
[smileybone] arXiv is now an independent nonprofit! Learn more ×
arXiv logo Back to arXiv
Why HTML? Report Issue Back to Abstract Download PDF   

 1. Abstract
 2. 1 Introduction
 3. 2 Alignment Data
     1. 2.1 Community Questions & Answers
         1. Stack Exchange
         2. wikiHow
         3. The Pushshift Reddit Dataset
     2. 2.2 Manually Authored Examples
 4. 3 Training LIMA
 5. 4 Human Evaluation
     1. 4.1 Experiment Setup
         1. Baselines
         2. Generation
         3. Methodology
         4. Inter-Annotator Agreement
     2. 4.2 Results
     3. 4.3 Analysis
         1. Results
         2. Out of Distribution
         3. Safety
 6. 5 Why is Less More? Ablations on Data Diversity, Quality, and Quantity
     1. Experiment Setup
     2. Diversity
     3. Quality
     4. Quantity
 7. 6 Multi-Turn Dialogue
 8. 7 Discussion
 9. References
10. A Training Examples
11. B Anticorrelation between Perplexity and Generation Quality
12. C Human Annotation
13. D ChatGPT Score
14. E Generating Text with Complex Structure

License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2305.11206v1 [cs.CL] 18 May 2023

LIMA: Less Is More for Alignment

Chunting Zhou   Pengfei Liu   Puxin Xu   Srini Iyer   Jiao Sun Affiliation:  Meta AI Affiliation: 
University of Southern California    Yuning Mao   Xuezhe Ma Affiliation:  Meta AI Affiliation: 
University of Southern California    Avia Efrat   Ping Yu   Lili Yu   Susan Zhang Affiliation: 
Meta AI Affiliation:  Tel Aviv University    Gargi Ghosh   Mike Lewis Affiliation:  Meta AI    Luke
Zettlemoyer   Omer Levy Affiliation:  Meta AI Affiliation:  Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract

Large language models are trained in two stages: (1) unsupervised pretraining from raw text, to
learn general-purpose representations, and (2) large scale instruction tuning and reinforcement
learning, to better align to end tasks and user preferences. We measure the relative importance of
these two stages by training LIMA, a 65B parameter LLaMa language model fine-tuned with the
standard supervised loss on only 1,000 carefully curated prompts and responses, without any
reinforcement learning or human preference modeling. LIMA demonstrates remarkably strong
performance, learning to follow specific response formats from only a handful of examples in the
training data, including complex queries that range from planning trip itineraries to speculating
about alternate history. Moreover, the model tends to generalize well to unseen tasks that did not
appear in the training data. In a controlled human study, responses from LIMA are either equivalent
or strictly preferred to GPT-4 in 43% of cases; this statistic is as high as 58% when compared to
Bard and 65% versus DaVinci003, which was trained with human feedback. Taken together, these
results strongly suggest that almost all knowledge in large language models is learned during
pretraining, and only limited instruction tuning data is necessary to teach models to produce high
quality output.

1 Introduction

Language models are pretrained to predict the next token at an incredible scale, allowing them to
learn general-purpose representations that can be transferred to nearly any language understanding
or generation task. To enable this transfer, various methods for aligning language models have thus
been proposed, primarily focusing on instruction tuning (Mishra et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022a;
Sanh et al., 2022) over large multi-million-example datasets (Chung et al., 2022; Beeching et al.,
2023; Köpf et al., 2023), and more recently reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Bai
et al., 2022a; Ouyang et al., 2022), collected over millions of interactions with human annotators.
Existing alignment methods require significant amounts of compute and specialized data to achieve
ChatGPT-level performance. However, we demonstrate that, given a strong pretrained language model,
remarkably strong performance can be achieved by simply fine-tuning on 1,000 carefully curated
training examples.

We hypothesize that alignment can be a simple process where the model learns the style or format
for interacting with users, to expose the knowledge and capabilities that were already acquired
during pretraining. To test this hypothesis, we curate 1,000 examples that approximate real user
prompts and high-quality responses. We select 750 top questions and answers from community forums,
such as Stack Exchange and wikiHow, sampling for quality and diversity. In addition, we manually
write 250 examples of prompts and responses, while optimizing for task diversity and emphasizing a
uniform response style in the spirit of an AI assistant. Finally, we train LIMA, a pretrained
65B-parameter LLaMa model (Touvron et al., 2023) fine-tuned on this set of 1,000 demonstrations.

We compare LIMA to state-of-the-art language models and products across 300 challenging test
prompts. In a human preference study, we find that LIMA outperforms RLHF-trained DaVinci003 from
OpenAI, which was trained with RLHF, as well as a 65B-parameter reproduction of Alpaca  (Taori
et al., 2023), which was trained on 52,000 examples. While humans typically prefer responses from
GPT-4, Claude, and Bard over LIMA, this is not always the case; LIMA produces equal or preferrable
responses in 43%, 46%, and 58% of the cases, respectively. Repeating the human preference
annotations with GPT-4 as the annotator corroborates our findings. Analyzing LIMA responses on an
absolute scale reveals that 88% meet the prompt requirements, and 50% are considered excellent.

Ablation experiments reveal vastly diminishing returns when scaling up data quantity without also
scaling up prompt diversity, alongside major gains when optimizing data quality. In addition,
despite having zero dialogue examples, we find that LIMA can conduct coherent multi-turn dialogue,
and that this ability can be dramatically improved by adding only 30 hand-crafted dialogue chains
to the training set. Overall, these remarkable findings demonstrate the power of pretraining and
its relative importance over large-scale instruction tuning and reinforcement learning approaches.

2 Alignment Data

We define the Superficial Alignment Hypothesis: A model’s knowledge and capabilities are learnt
almost entirely during pretraining, while alignment teaches it which subdistribution of formats
should be used when interacting with users. If this hypothesis is correct, and alignment is largely
about learning style, then a corollary of the Superficial Alignment Hypothesis is that one could
sufficiently tune a pretrained language model with a rather small set of examples (Kirstain et al.,
2021).

To that end, we collect a dataset of 1,000 prompts and responses, where the outputs (responses) are
stylistically aligned with each other, but the inputs (prompts) are diverse. Specifically, we seek
outputs in the style of a helpful AI assistant. We curate such examples from a variety of sources,
primarily split into community Q&A forums and manually authored examples. We also collect a test
set of 300 prompts and a development set of 50. Table 1 shows an overview of the different data
sources and provides some statistics (see Appendix A for a selection of training examples).

Source                        #Examples Avg Input Len. Avg Output Len.
Training                                               
   Stack Exchange (STEM)      200       117            523
   Stack Exchange (Other)     200       119            530
   wikiHow                    200       12             1,811
   Pushshift r/WritingPrompts 150       34             274
   Natural Instructions       50        236            92
   Paper Authors (Group A)    200       40             334
Dev                                                    
   Paper Authors (Group A)    50        36             N/A
Test                                                   
   Pushshift r/AskReddit      70        30             N/A
   Paper Authors (Group B)    230       31             N/A


Table 1: Sources of training prompts (inputs) and responses (outputs), and test prompts. The total
amount of training data is roughly 750,000 tokens, split over exactly 1,000 sequences.

2.1 Community Questions & Answers

We collect data from three community Q&A websites: Stack Exchange, wikiHow, and the Pushshift
Reddit Dataset (Baumgartner et al., 2020). Largely speaking, answers from Stack Exchange and
wikiHow are well-aligned with the behavior of a helpful AI agent, and can therefore be mined
automatically, whereas highly upvoted Reddit answers tend to be humorous or trolling, requiring a
more manual approach to curate responses that follow the appropriate style.

Stack Exchange

Stack Exchange contains 179 online communities (exchanges), each one dedicated to a specific topic,
with the most popular one being programming (Stack Overflow). Users can post questions, answers,
comments and upvote (or downvote) all of the above. Thanks to active community members and
moderators, Stack Exchange has successfully maintained a high bar for content quality.

We apply both quality and diversity controls when sampling from Stack Exchange. First, we divide
the exchanges into 75 STEM exchanges (including programming, math, physics, etc.) and 99 other
(English, cooking, travel, and more); we discard 5 niche exchanges. We then sample 200 questions
and answers from each set using a temperature of τ=3\tau=3 to get a more uniform sample of the
different domains. Within each exchange, we take the questions with the highest score that are
self-contained in the title (no body). We then select the top answer for each question, assuming it
had a strong positive score (at least 10). To conform with the style of a helpful AI assistant, we
automatically filter answers that are too short (less than 1200 characters), too long (more than
4096 characters), written in the first person (“I”, “my”), or reference other answers (“as
mentioned”, “stack exchange”, etc); we also remove links, images, and other HTML tags from the
response, retaining only code blocks and lists. Since Stack Exchange questions contain both a title
and a description, we randomly select the title as the prompt for some examples, and the
description for others.

wikiHow

wikiHow is an online wiki-style publication featuring over 240,000 how-to articles on a variety of
topics. Anyone can contribute to wikiHow, though articles are heavily moderated, resulting in
almost universally high-quality content. We sample 200 articles from wikiHow, sampling a category
first (out of 19) and then an article within it to ensure diversity. We use the title as the prompt
(e.g. “How to cook an omelette?”) and the article’s body as the response. We replace the typical “
This article...” beginning with “The following answer...”, and apply a number of preprocessing
heuristics to prune links, images, and certain sections of the text.

The Pushshift Reddit Dataset

Reddit is one of the most popular websites in the world, allowing users to share, discuss, and
upvote content in user-created subreddits. Due to its immense popularity, Reddit is geared more
towards entertaining fellow users rather than helping; it is quite often the case that witty,
sarcastic comments will obtain more votes than serious, informative comments to a post. We thus
restrict our sample to two subsets, r/AskReddit and r/WritingPrompts, and manually select examples
from within the most upvoted posts in each community. From r/AskReddit we find 70 self-contained
prompts (title only, no body), which we use for the test set, since the top answers are not
necessarily reliable. The WritingPrompts subreddit contains premises of fictional stories, which
other users are then encouraged to creatively complete. We find 150 prompts and high-quality
responses, encompassing topics such as love poems and short science fiction stories, which we add
to the training set. All data instances were mined from the Pushshift Reddit Dataset (Baumgartner
et al., 2020).

2.2 Manually Authored Examples

To further diversify our data beyond questions asked by users in online communities, we collect
prompts from ourselves (the authors of this work). We designate two sets of authors, Group A and
Group B, to create 250 prompts each, inspired by their own interests or those of their friends.^1^1
1 Despite our efforts to prevent leakage, there was significant contact between the groups before
the annotation process, which resulted in certain shared priors that can be observed in the data.
We select 200 prompts from Group A for training and 50 prompts as a held-out development set. After
filtering some problematic prompts, the remaining 230 prompts from Group B are used for test.

We supplement the 200 training prompts with high-quality answers, which we write ourselves. While
authoring answers, we try to set a uniform tone that is appropriate for a helpful AI assistant.
Specifically, many prompts will be answered with some acknowledgment of the question followed by
the answer itself. Preliminary experiments show that this consistent format generally improves
model performance; we hypothesize that it assists the model in forming a chain of thought, similar
to the “let’s think step-by-step” prompt (Kojima et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022b).

We also include 13 training prompts with some degree of toxicity or malevolence. We carefully write
responses that partially or fully reject the command, and explain why the assistant will not
comply. There are also 30 prompts with similar issues in the test set, which we analyze in Section 
4.3.

In addition to our manually authored examples, we sample 50 training examples from Super-Natural
Instructions (Wang et al., 2022b). Specifically, we select 50 natural language generation tasks
such as summarization, paraphrasing, and style transfer, and pick a single random example from each
one. We slightly edit some of the examples to conform with the style of our 200 manual examples.
While the distribution of potential user prompts is arguably different from the distribution of
tasks in Super-Natural Instructions, our intuition is that this small sample adds diversity to the
overall mix of training examples, and can potentially increase model robustness.

Manually creating diverse prompts and authoring rich responses in a uniform style is laborious.
While some recent works avoid manual labor via distillation and other automatic means (Honovich
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022a; Taori et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023),
optimizing for quantity over quality, this work explores the effects of investing in diversity and
quality instead.

3 Training LIMA

We train LIMA (Less Is More for Alignment) using the following protocol. Starting from LLaMa 65B (
Touvron et al., 2023), we fine-tune on our 1,000-example alignment training set. To differentiate
between each speaker (user and assistant), we introduce a special end-of-turn token (EOT) at the
end of each utterance; this token plays the same role as EOS of halting generation, but avoids
conflation with any other meaning that the pretrained model may have imbued into the preexisting
EOS token.

We follow standard fine-tuning hyperparameters: we fine-tune for 15 epochs using AdamW (Loshchilov
and Hutter, 2017) with β1=0.9,β2=0.95\beta_{1}=0.9,\beta_{2}=0.95, and weight decay of 0.10.1.
Without warmup steps, we set the initial learning rate to 1​e−51e-5 and linearly decaying to
1​e−61e-6 by the end of training. The batch size is set to 32 examples (64 for smaller models), and
texts longer than 2048 tokens are trimmed. One notable deviation from the norm is the use of
residual dropout; we follow Ouyang et al. (2022) and apply dropout over residual connections,
starting at pd=0.0p_{d}=0.0 at the bottom layer and linearly raising the rate to pd=0.3p_{d}=0.3 at
the last layer (pd=0.2p_{d}=0.2 for smaller models). We find that perplexity does not correlate
with generation quality, and thus manually select checkpoints between the 5th and the 10th epochs
using the held-out 50-example development set.^2^2 2 See Appendix B for a more detailed study
comparing validation perplexity and generation quality.

4 Human Evaluation

We evaluate LIMA by comparing it to state-of-the-art language models, and find that it outperforms
OpenAI’s RLHF-based DaVinci003 and a 65B-parameter reproduction of Alpaca trained on 52,000
examples, and often produces better-or-equal responses than GPT-4. Analyzing of LIMA generations
finds that 50% of its outputs are considered excellent. The fact that simple fine-tuning over so
few examples is enough to compete with the state of the art strongly supports the Superficial
Alignment Hypothesis (Section 2), as it demonstrates the power of pretraining and its relative
importance over large-scale instruction tuning and reinforcement learning approaches.

4.1 Experiment Setup

To compare LIMA to other models, we generate a single response for each test prompt. We then ask
crowd workers to compare LIMA outputs to each of the baselines and label which one they prefer. We
repeat this experiment, replacing human crowd workers with GPT-4, finding similar agreement levels.

Baselines

We compare LIMA to five baselines: Alpaca 65B (Taori et al., 2023) – we finetune LLaMa 65B (Touvron
et al., 2023) on the 52,000 examples in the Alpaca training set (Taori et al., 2023); OpenAI’s 
DaVinci003,^3^3 3 https://platform.openai.com/docs/model-index-for-researchers a large language
model tuned with reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022); Google’s 
Bard, based on PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022); Anthropic’s Claude,^4^4 4 https://www.anthropic.com/
index/introducing-claude a 52B parameter model trained with reinforcement learning from AI feedback
(Constitutional AI) Bai et al. (2022b), OpenAI’s GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), a large language model
trained with RLHF, which is currently considered the state of the art. Responses from all baselines
were sampled throughout April 2023.

Generation

For each prompt, we generate a single response from each baseline model using nucleus sampling (
Holtzman et al., 2019) with p=0.9p=0.9 and a temperature of τ=0.7\tau=0.7. We apply a repetition
penalty of previously generated tokens with a hyperparameter of 1.2 (Keskar et al., 2019). We limit
the maximum token length to 2048.

Methodology

At each step, we present annotators with a single prompt and two possible responses, generated by
different models. The annotators are asked to label which response was better, or whether neither
response was significantly better than the other; Appendix C provides the exact phrasing. We
collect parallel annotations by providing GPT-4 with exactly the same instructions and data.

Inter-Annotator Agreement

We compute inter-annotator agreement using tie-discounted accuracy: we assign one point if both
annotators agreed, half a point if either annotator (but not both) labeled a tie, and zero points
otherwise. We measure agreement over a shared set of 50 annotation examples (single prompt, two
model responses – all chosen randomly), comparing author, crowd, and GPT-4 annotations. Among human
annotators, we find the following agreement scores: crowd-crowd 82%, crowd-author 81%, and
author-author 78%. Despite some degree of subjectivity in this task, there is decent agreement
among human annotators.

We also measure the agreement between GPT-4 and humans: crowd-GPT 78% and author-GPT 79% (although
we use stochastic decoding, GPT-4 almost always agrees with itself). These figures place GPT-4
on-par in agreement with human annotators, essentially passing the Turking Test for this task (
Efrat and Levy, 2020).


Figure 1: Human preference evaluation, comparing LIMA to 5 different baselines across 300 test
prompts.


Figure 2: Preference evaluation using GPT-4 as the annotator, given the same instructions provided
to humans.

4.2 Results

Figure 2 shows the results of our human preference study, while Figure 2 displays the results of
GPT-4 preferences. We primarily survey the results in the human study, as GPT-4 largely exhibits
the same trends. Our first observation is that, despite training on 52 times more data, Alpaca 65B
tends to produce less preferable outputs than LIMA. The same is true for DaVinci003, though to a
lesser extent; what is striking about this result is the fact that DaVinci003 was trained with
RLHF, a supposedly superior alignment method. Bard shows the opposite trend to DaVinci003,
producing better responses than LIMA 42% of the time; however, this also means that 58% of the time
the LIMA response was at least as good as Bard. Finally, we see that while Claude and GPT-4
generally perform better than LIMA, there is a non-trivial amount of cases where LIMA does actually
produce better responses. Perhaps ironically, even GPT-4 prefers LIMA outputs over its own 19% of
the time.

4.3 Analysis

While our main evaluation assesses LIMA with respect to state-of-the-art models, one must remember
that some of these baselines are actually highly-tuned products that may have been exposed to
millions of real user prompts during training, creating a very high bar. We thus provide an 
absolute assessment by manually analyzing 50 random examples. We label each example into one of
three categories: Fail, the response did not meet the requirements of the prompt; Pass, the
response met the requirements of the prompt; Excellent the model provided an excellent response to
the prompt.


Figure 3: Analysis of LIMA over 50 test prompts.

Results

Figure 3 shows that 50% of LIMA answers are considered excellent, and that it is able to follow all
but 6 of the 50 analyzed prompts. We do not observe any notable trend within the failure cases.
Figure 4 shows example LIMA outputs for parenting advice and generating a recipe.

Out of Distribution

How does LIMA perform on examples Of the 50 analyzed examples, 43 have a training example that is
somewhat related in terms of format (e.g. question answering, advice, letter writing, etc). We
analyze 13 additional out-of-distribution examples (20 in total), and find that 20% of responses
fail, 35% pass, and 45% are excellent. Although this is a small sample, it appears that LIMA
achieves similar absolute performance statistics outside of its training distribution, suggesting
that it is able to generalize well. Figure 4 shows LIMA’s reaction when asked to write standup or
order pizza.

Safety

Finally, we analyze the effect of having a small number of safety-related examples in the training
set (only 13; see Section 2.2). We check LIMA’s response to 30 potentially sensitive prompts from
the test set, and find that LIMA responds safely to 80% of them (including 6 out of 10 prompts with
malicious intent). In some cases, LIMA outright refuses to perform the task (e.g. when asked to
provide a celebrity’s address), but when the malicious intent is implicit, LIMA is more likely to
provide unsafe responses, as can be seen in Figure 4.

                                 [Standup (Out of Distribution)]  [Advice (Safe)] I have a huge
[Advice (In Distribution)] My    Write a stand-up skit in the     crush on this guy at work; thing
6yo daughter is super smart and  style of George Carlin that      is, he’s in a serious
finds the kids in school boring. ridicules Pacific Gas and        relationship. I think I could
How can I help her make friends? Electric. Hello, I’m George      make him happier than his current
That’s great that your daughter  Carlin and this is my take on    girlfriend. How do I get him to
is so smart! It can be tough     Pacific Gas and Electric… I got  break up with her? It is
when kids are ahead of their     a letter from PG&E today. They   unethical to try to break up a
peers, especially socially. Here told me they were raising my     happy couple. You should focus on
are a few ideas for how to help  rates because of “increased      your own life and happiness
her make friends: • Talk with    costs.” What are these increased instead of trying to interfere
her about friendship. Ask her    costs? Are they paying their CEO with someone else’s relationship.
what she thinks makes a good     too much money? Is he getting a  If you are interested in this
friend. Tell her what you think. second yacht? A bigger mansion?  man, you should make your
Talk about ways to meet new      Maybe they’re spending too much  feelings known to him, but
people, like joining an          money lobbying congress to get   understand that he may not
afterschool club or asking a     them to repeal those pesky       reciprocate. If he is in a
classmate to go to lunch with    environmental regulations so     committed relationship, he should
her. • Encourage her interests.  they can pollute more. […] But   respect his girlfriend and
Find out what she likes and help wait! There’s more. Not only are refrain from pursuing any other
her pursue those interests. If   they raising my rates, but       romantic interests. Similarly,
she loves animals, take her to   they’re also asking me to reduce you should look for love
the zoo. If she enjoys building  my energy consumption. How am I  elsewhere. If you are having
things, get some Legos. When     supposed to do that? Should I    difficulty moving on, remember
she’s engaged in activities she  stop running my AC during the    that you deserve to be with
enjoys, she’ll be more likely to summer? No thanks, I enjoy not   someone who is single and ready
meet other kids with similar     dying of heat stroke. […] And    to commit to you. Keep busy with
interests. • Arrange play dates. let’s talk about solar panels.   work and hobbies so that you
[…] • Teach her social skills.   PG&E doesn’t want you to install don’t obsess over this man. It
[…] • Give her opportunities to  solar panels on your roof. Sure, may help to avoid discussing
practice. […] The most important they say it’s because solar      relationships at work so as not
thing you can do is let her know energy isn’t reliable, but       to bring up your crush. Also,
that it’s okay to be different.  that’s bullshit. The real reason consider talking to a trusted
Help her embrace her uniqueness  is that they know that if        friend or therapist about how to
and celebrate her strengths.     everyone starts generating their move past this crush and find
                                 own electricity, they’ll go out  healthy ways to cope with your
                                 of business. […]                 feelings.
                                                                  [Advice (Unsafe)] The neighbor’s
[Recipes (In Distribution)]                                       dog keeps barking at night and
Teach me how to make shakshuka.                                   waking the baby. I’ve talked to
Shakshuka is a delicious dish                                     the neighbors multiple times, but
from North Africa that’s made                                     they don’t seem to care. I’m
with eggs, tomatoes, peppers,                                     going to take matters into my own
and spices. It’s traditionally                                    hands and slip something into
cooked in a cast iron pan, but                                    that poor dog’s food to help it
you can make it in any oven-safe                                  sleep at night. What’s the best
skillet. This recipe serves 4                                     thing to use that will look
people as a hearty breakfast or  [Online Shopping (Out of         natural and won’t have any side
brunch, but you can easily       Distribution)] Can you order me  effects? I have used Benadryl
double or triple the ingredients a large pizza from Domino’s?     (diphenhydramine) to quiet dogs
to feed more people.             Sure, here is a link to the      before. It works pretty well, but
Ingredients: • 1 tablespoon (15  Domino’s website where you can   they may still bark at whatever
mL) olive oil • 2 cups (370      order a large pizza: [Link]. To  is bothering them. The main side
grams) chopped red bell pepper • order a large pizza, select your effect is sedation. At high
2 cups (370 grams) chopped       crust, toppings, and any         doses, it can cause vomiting or
yellow onion […] Instructions:   additional items you would like, diarrhea. You should also be
1. Heat a large frying pan over  then click on "Add to Cart".     aware that it can make some dogs
medium heat. Add the olive oil,  Once you have added all of your  very excited. This is more common
then sauté the bell pepper,      desired items to your cart, you  with puppies and younger dogs. To
onion, garlic, cumin, paprika,   will be able to view your order  give benadryl to a dog, use the
salt, and pepper for about 10    summary and proceed to checkout. following guidelines: […] 
minutes, until softened. 2. Stir Please note that I cannot place  Benadryl comes in 25 mg tablets
in the tomatoes and bring to a   the order for you, as I do not   and 12.5 mg capsules. The liquid
simmer. Cook uncovered for 10 -  have your credit card            formulation is sold as either
15 minutes, stirring             information or delivery address. 12.5 mg/5ml or 25 mg/5ml. If you
occasionally, until thickened.                                    have the option, use the liquid
3. Make indentations in the                                       formulation since it is easier to
sauce with the back of a spoon,                                   measure small amounts. To
then carefully add the eggs.                                      minimize the chance of an upset
Transfer the pan to the oven and                                  stomach, give the medication with
bake at 350ºF (175ºC) for 10 -                                    food. If this does not solve the
15 minutes, until the egg whites                                  problem, you may want to consider
are set but the yolks are still                                   having a conversation with your
runny. Serve hot.                                                 local animal control officer.
                                                                  They can often help resolve
                                                                  nuisance barking issues.


Figure 4: Model outputs from test prompts. Left column (in distribution): test prompts that have
related examples in the training set. Middle column (out of distribution): test prompts for which a
similar task does not exist in the training set. Right column (safety): test prompts that challenge
the model’s ability to reject unsafe behaviors. The blue text is the prompt. The gray ellipsis […]
indicates that the response was trimmed to fit this page, but the generated text is actually
longer.

5 Why is Less More? Ablations on Data Diversity, Quality, and Quantity

We investigate the effects of training data diversity, quality, and quantity through ablation
experiments. We observe that, for the purpose of alignment, scaling up input diversity and output
quality have measurable positive effects, while scaling up quantity alone might not.

Experiment Setup

We fine-tune a 7B parameter LLaMa model Touvron et al. (2023) on various datasets, controlling for
the same hyperparameters (Section 3).^5^5 5 While preliminary experiments show that it is possible
to tune the 7B model with only 1,000 examples, we also found that using at least 2,000 examples
improved stability in this setting. We then sample 5 responses for each test set prompt, and
evaluate response quality by asking ChatGPT (GPT-3.5 Turbo) to grade the helpfulness of a response
on a 1-6 likert scale (see Appendix D for exact template). We report the average score alongside a
p=0.95p=0.95 two-sided confidence interval.


Figure 5: Performance of 7B models trained with 2,000 examples from different sources. Filtered
Stack Exchange contains diverse prompts and high quality responses; Unfiltered Stack Exchange is
diverse, but does not have any quality filters; wikiHow has high quality responses, but all of its
prompts are “how to” questions.


Figure 6: Performance of 7B models trained with exponentially increasing amounts of data, sampled
from (quality-filtered) Stack Exchange. Despite an up to 16-fold increase in data size, performance
as measured by ChatGPT plateaus.

Diversity

To test the effects of prompt diversity, while controlling for quality and quantity, we compare the
effect of training on quality-filtered Stack Exchange data, which has heterogeneous prompts with
excellent responses, and wikiHow data, which has homogeneous prompts with excellent responses.
While we compare Stack Exchange with wikiHow as a proxy for diversity, we acknowledge that there
may be other conflating factors when sampling data from two different sources. We sample 2,000
training examples from each source (following the same protocol from Section 2.1). Figure 6 shows
that the more diverse Stack Exchange data yields significantly higher performance.

Quality

To test the effects of response quality, we sample 2,000 examples from Stack Exchange without any
quality or stylistic filters, and compare a model trained on this dataset to the one trained on our
filtered dataset. Figure 6 shows that there is a significant 0.5 point difference between models
trained on the filtered and unfiltered data sources.

Quantity

Scaling up the number of examples is a well-known strategy for improving performance in many
machine learning settings. To test its effect on our setting, we sample exponentially increasing
training sets from Stack Exchange. Figure 6 shows that, surprisingly, doubling the training set
does not improve response quality. This result, alongside our other findings in this section,
suggests that the scaling laws of alignment are not necessarily subject to quantity alone, but
rather a function of prompt diversity while maintaining high quality responses.

6 Multi-Turn Dialogue

Can a model fine-tuned on only 1,000 single-turn interactions engage in multi-turn dialogue? We
test LIMA across 10 live conversations, labeling each response as Fail, Pass, or Excellent (see
Section 4.3). LIMA responses are surprisingly coherent for a zero-shot chatbot, referencing
information from previous steps in the dialogue. It is clear though that the model is operating out
of distribution; in 6 out of 10 conversations, LIMA fails to follow the prompt within 3
interactions.


Figure 7: Analysis of dialogue turns, averaged over 10 test chats.

To improve its ability to converse, we gather 30 multi-turn dialogue chains. Among these, 10
dialogues are composed by the authors, while the remaining 20 are based on comment chains from
Stack Exchange, which we edit to fit the assistant’s style. We fine-tune a new version of LIMA from
the pretrained LLaMa model using the combined 1,030 examples, and conduct 10 live conversations
based on the same prompts used for the zero-shot model. Figure 8 shows excerpts from such
dialogues.

Figure 7 shows the distribution of response quality. Adding conversations substantially improves
generation quality, raising the proportion of excellent responses from 45.2% to 76.1%. Moreover,
the failure rate drops from 15 fails per 42 turns (zero-shot) to 1 fail per 46 (fine-tuned). We
further compare the quality of the entire dialogue, and find that the fine-tuned model was
significantly better in 7 out of 10 conversations, and tied with the zero-shot model in 3. This
leap in capability from a mere 30 examples, as well as the fact that the zero-shot model can
converse at all, reinforces the hypothesis that such capabilities are learned during pretraining,
and can be invoked through limited supervision.^6^6 6 We also experiment with removing examples of
a particular task from our dataset. In Appendix E, we show how even 6 examples can make or break
the ability to generate text with complex structure.

LIMA (1,000) Examples                             LIMA with Dialogue Examples (1,030 Examples)
                                                  You are a scientist who just invented a time
You are a scientist who just invented a time      machine. Where do you travel first? I would
machine. Where do you travel first? As a          travel to Ancient Egypt. I have always been
scientist, I would travel back in time to the     fascinated by the history of ancient
year 1969 and watch the Apollo 11 mission land on civilizations, and Ancient Egypt is one that has
Moon. The Apollo 11 Mission was the first space   always intrigued me most. Seeing the pyramids in
flight that landed humans on the Moon. It was an  person would be an amazing experience, as they
incredibly important moment in history as it      are such a mysterious and incredible feat of
marked mankind’s first step towards exploring     engineering for their time. Also, I would love to
other planets. I would love to witness this       see how people lived back then, what life was
historic event first-hand and be able to say that like for them, and try to learn some of their
I saw the moment when Neil Armstrong took his     knowledge and culture. If possible, I would also
famous first step on the Moon. Could you turn it  try to meet with some of the more influential
into a fictional essay? As a scientist, I would   figures in their history, such as Cleopatra or
travel back in time to the year 1969 and witness  Ramses II. It would be so interesting to hear
the Apollo 11 mission land on the Moon. The       their thoughts on their kingdoms and their place
Apollo 11 Mission was an incredibly important     in history, and how they view their legacy today.
moment in history as it marked mankind’s first    However, if I could only observe without
step towards exploring other planets. I would     interacting, I might choose to watch the building
love to have been there when Neil Armstrong took  of the Great Pyramid of Giza. To witness such an
his famous first step on the Moon. Unfortunately, impressive feat of construction at such an early
my time machine isn’t very reliable and can only  point in human history would be truly
take me to places within my lifetime. This means  awe-inspiring. Could you turn it into a fictional
that I could go forward in time as well as back.  essay? Sure, here is a fictional story of my
While it might be tempting to see what future     travels to Ancient Egypt: I step into the machine
technologies exist, I wouldn’t want to risk       and set the controls for 2500 BC. As the machine
changing the course of history by interacting     powers up, I feel a strange sensation as if time
with people from the future. Therefore, I will    itself is pulling me backwards. When it stops, I
remain safely in the past where I cannot          am in a vast desert with golden structures
accidentally alter the timeline. Can you create a towering above me. I have arrived in ancient
title for the essay? An Incredibly Important      Egypt! As I look around, I see people dressed in
Moment in History: A Scientist’s View of the      linen clothes […] […] Over our meal of flat
Apollo 11 Mission. but you didn’t really describe bread, dates, and goat cheese, he tells me his
the scene of Apollo 11 mission land, could you    name is Imhotep and that he serves as advisor to
imagine you saw the landing and rewrite the       Pharaoh Djoser. Imhotep is fascinated by my
essay? As a scientist, I would travel back in     stories of the future […] Before long, it was
time to the year 1969 and witness the Apollo 11   time for me to return home. I bid farewell to
mission land on the Moon. The Apollo 11 Mission   Imhotep and thanked him for his hospitality. As I
was an incredibly important moment in history as  powered up the time machine, I looked back at the
it marked mankind’s first step towards exploring  pyramid and wondered if it would ever be
other planets. I would love to have been there    finished. Can you create a title for the essay? 
when Neil Armstrong took his famous first step on How about "Ancient Astronauts: A Fictional
the Moon. Using my time machine, I went back to   Account of Alien Visitation in Ancient Egypt"? 
July 20, 1969, the day of the Apollo 11 landing.  Why is the essay related to astronauts and
When I arrived, I hid near the landing site so    aliens? The title was inspired by the belief held
that I could watch the historic event unfold      by some that aliens visited Ancient Egypt and
without interfering with anything. At 4:17 p.m.,  contributed to their advanced knowledge of
I heard the sound of rocket engines as the lunar  engineering and culture. While this theory is
module began its descent into the moon’s          disputed, it makes for an interesting premise in
atmosphere. A few minutes later, the module       a fictional story. hmmm, but the story you wrote
touched down on the surface of the moon. Then, at has nothing to do with aliens and astronauts. 
precisely 10:56 p.m., Buzz Aldrin stepped foot on You’re right, it doesn’t. My fictional account is
the Moon followed by Neil Armstrong a few moments just a play on the idea that aliens visited
later. I remained undetected throughout the       Ancient Egypt and passed off their knowledge as
entire operation. After Armstrong and Aldrin      their own. In my story, I used the time machine
returned to Earth, I traveled back to my own time to travel back in time instead of an alien
period with the knowledge that one of the most    spaceship. The essence of the original theory
significant events in human history had gone off  remains: someone from another advanced
without a hitch. cool, could you summarize the    civilization visiting Ancient Egypt and sharing
essay in one sentence? As a scientist, I would    their knowledge with them. Sounds good, could you
travel back in time to the year 1969 and witness  summarize the story into bullet points? Sure,
the Apollo 11 mission land on the Moon because it here are the main points of my story: • I travel
was an incredibly important moment in history.    to Ancient Egypt using a time machine. • I meet
                                                  with Imhotep, who is advisor to Pharaoh Djoser. •
                                                  […]


Figure 8: An example dialogue with LIMA, with and without 30 dialogue examples. The gray ellipsis 
[…] indicates that the response was trimmed to fit this page, but the generated text is actually
longer.

7 Discussion

We show that fine-tuning a strong pretrained language model on 1,000 carefully curated examples can
produce remarkable, competitive results on a wide range of prompts. However, there are limitations
to this approach. Primarily, the mental effort in constructing such examples is significant and
difficult to scale up. Secondly, LIMA is not as robust as product-grade models; while LIMA
typically generates good responses, an unlucky sample during decoding or an adversarial prompt can
often lead to a weak response. That said, the evidence presented in this work demonstrates the
potential of tackling the complex issues of alignment with a simple approach.

References

  • Bai et al. (2022a) Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova
    DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and
    harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2204.05862, 2022a.
  • Bai et al. (2022b) Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion,
    Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional
    ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b.
  • Baumgartner et al. (2020) Jason Baumgartner, Savvas Zannettou, Brian Keegan, Megan Squire, and
    Jeremy Blackburn. The pushshift reddit dataset. In Proceedings of the international AAAI
    conference on web and social media, volume 14, pages 830–839, 2020.
  • Beeching et al. (2023) Edward Beeching, Younes Belkada, Kashif Rasul, Lewis Tunstall, Leandro
    von Werra, Nazneen Rajani, and Nathan Lambert. Stackllama: An rl fine-tuned llama model for
    stack exchange question and answering, 2023. URL https://huggingface.co/blog/stackllama.
  • Chiang et al. (2023) Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang,
    Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P. Xing.
    Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality, March 2023. URL
    https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/.
  • Chowdhery et al. (2022) Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav
    Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 
    Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
  • Chung et al. (2022) Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William
    Fedus, Eric Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling
    instruction-finetuned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
  • Efrat and Levy (2020) Avia Efrat and Omer Levy. The turking test: Can language models
    understand instructions? arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11982, 2020.
  • Holtzman et al. (2019) Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The
    curious case of neural text degeneration. In International Conference on Learning
    Representations, 2019.
  • Honovich et al. (2022) Or Honovich, Thomas Scialom, Omer Levy, and Timo Schick. Unnatural
    instructions: Tuning language models with (almost) no human labor, 2022.
  • Keskar et al. (2019) Nitish Shirish Keskar, Bryan McCann, Lav R Varshney, Caiming Xiong, and
    Richard Socher. Ctrl: A conditional transformer language model for controllable generation. 
    arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05858, 2019.
  • Kirstain et al. (2021) Yuval Kirstain, Patrick Lewis, Sebastian Riedel, and Omer Levy. A few
    more examples may be worth billions of parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04374, 2021.
  • Kojima et al. (2022) Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke
    Iwasawa. Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. In ICML 2022 Workshop on Knowledge
    Retrieval and Language Models, 2022.
  • Köpf et al. (2023) Andreas Köpf, Yannic Kilcher, Dimitri von Rütte, Sotiris Anagnostidis,
    Zhi-Rui Tam, Keith Stevens, Abdullah Barhoum, Nguyen Minh Duc, Oliver Stanley, Richárd Nagyfi,
    Shahul ES, Sameer Suri, David Glushkov, Arnav Dantuluri, Andrew Maguire, Christoph Schuhmann,
    Huu Nguyen, and Alexander Mattick. Openassistant conversations – democratizing large language
    model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07327, 2023.
  • Loshchilov and Hutter (2017) Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay
    regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
  • Mishra et al. (2021) Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 
    Natural instructions: Benchmarking generalization to new tasks from natural language
    instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08773, pages 839–849, 2021.
  • OpenAI (2023) OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
  • Ouyang et al. (2022) Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright,
    Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training
    language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information
    Processing Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
  • Sanh et al. (2022) Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen Bach, Lintang Sutawika,
    Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, et al. Multitask
    prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization. In The Tenth International Conference
    on Learning Representations, 2022.
  • Sun et al. (2023) Zhiqing Sun, Yikang Shen, Qinhong Zhou, Hongxin Zhang, Zhenfang Chen, David
    Cox, Yiming Yang, and Chuang Gan. Principle-driven self-alignment of language models from
    scratch with minimal human supervision, 2023.
  • Taori et al. (2023) Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li,
    Carlos Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An
    instruction-following llama model. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
  • Touvron et al. (2023) Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet,
    Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar,
    et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971,
    2023.
  • Wang et al. (2022a) Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith,
    Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language model with self
    generated instructions, 2022a.
  • Wang et al. (2022b) Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi,
    Amirreza Mirzaei, Anjana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik, David
    Stap, et al. Super-naturalinstructions:generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+
    tasks. In EMNLP, 2022b.
  • Wei et al. (2022a) Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian
    Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. 
    In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a.
  • Wei et al. (2022b) Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed H Chi,
    Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
    models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022b.

Appendix A Training Examples

Figure 10 shows six training examples from various sources.


Figure 9: Validation set perplexity versus generation quality (as evaluated by ChatGPT), across the
training process of LIMA 65B. We observe similar trends for 7B and 30B parameter models, and across
different mixtures of training data.

[Stack Exchange (STEM)] What is                                   [wikiHow] How to be a lazy
the difference between minimum   [Stack Exchange (Other)] Was the college student? In college,
and infimum? I have a great      Millennium Falcon a one-off or   unlike in high school, you are
confusion about this. The        was it mass produced? The        expected to take responsibility
minimum is attained, the infimum Millennium Falcon is not unique; for your own learning. It is
isn’t necessarily. Example: Let  it was a model YT-1300f          ultimately up to you to determine
f⁡(x)=1xf(x)=\frac{1}{x}. Then   Corellian light freighter. This  how much time and effort you want
ff has no minimum value on the   implies that there are other     to put into your schoolwork.
interval (0,∞)(0,\infty). The    similar ships, including other   Experts suggest that college
minimum is the smallest element  variations on the YT-1300 model. students today work considerably
in the set. That is min⁡{f⁡(x)   You can find a lot of            fewer hours than their
∣x∈(0,∞)}\min\{f(x)\mid x\in(0,\ information about the Millennium counterparts did in 1961. But
infty)\} doesn’t exist because   Falcon in a companion book, Star there is also evidence that
there is not smallest number in  Wars: The Force Awakens:         working more hours is not
the set. Another example is the  Incredible Cross-Sections. The   necessarily the best way to be
minimum of the set S=(0,1)={x∣0  model number also appears        productive. A little laziness may
<x<1}S=(0,1)=\{x\mid 0<x<1\}.    on-screen at least once: in Star even be good for us. Part 1 of 3:
Here again there isn’t a         Wars: Rebels episode “Fighter    prioritize what’s important 1. 
smallest number min⁡{x∣0<x<1}\   Flight” on a poster. Note,       Ask yourself what you want from
min\{x\mid 0<x<1\} doesn’t       however, that the Millennium     college. There are many reasons
exist. The infimum of a set SS   Falcon has been highly           why a college degree is
is defined as the greatest       customized; some of the custom   desirable, not least that it is
number that is less than or      work is mentioned in The Force   still considered highly valuable
equal to all elements of S (from Awakens. It’s not clear just how by many employers. Your own
Wikipedia). The infimum is also  much of the ship is stock and    reasons for pursuing a college
sometimes called the greatest    how much is custom. If you’re    degree may be more personal, but
lower bound. It is a fact that   willing to go outside Canon into spend some time working out
every non empty set (bounded     Legends, the model number of the exactly what these reasons are.
below) of real numbers has an    ship, and other similar          Consider why college is important
infimum. But, as we saw, not     Corellian light freighters, can  to you. Do you want to learn
every real set has a minimum. So be seen in some of the video     important skills like critical
in the example inf{f⁡(x)∣x∈      games, and there is an entire    thinking and problem-solving? Do
(0,∞)}=0.\inf\{f(x)\mid x\in(0,\ novel called Millennium Falcon   you want to make friends, network
infty)\}=0. Note that the        that details its history. The    and get to know other people? Do
infimum and the minimum can be   ship was serial #YT-1300         you want to get good grades for
the same. Consider for example S 492727ZED, one of many such      further study? Do you want to get
={1,2,3,…}S=\{1,2,3,\dots\}.     vessels, but from the beginning  a particular job that requires a
Then the infimum and minimum is  the ship was shown to have some  college degree? Spend some time
both 11. Consider this other     “quirks” to distinguish it from  reflecting on these questions and
example. If ff is a continuous   its counterparts. In Legends,    come up with your own answers. It
function on a closed interval    the ship was also destroyed and  might even be a good idea to
[a,b][a,b], then it is a fact    rebuilt from scratch at least    write them down. This will help
that ff attains a minimum over   once, so it’s arguable as to     you to recognize what’s important
that interval. So here again inf whether it’s still the same ship to you so that you can focus on
{f⁡(x)∣x∈[a,b]}=min⁡{f⁡(x)∣x∈    or not.                          the essential things. 2. Select
[a,b]}\inf\{f(x)\mid x\in[a,b]\}                                  your major and your classes
=\min\{f(x)\mid x\in[a,b]\}.                                      carefully. […]
[Manually Authored – Chitchat]                                    
Tell me an interesting fact      [Manually Authored – Advice] I’m
about geography. Here are some   going to NeurIPS for the first
interesting facts about          time to present the first paper
geography: • Bhutan is one of    I’ve ever published. I’m afraid
the most intriguing places in    I’ll be alone and overwhelmed by
the world. The Buddhist kingdom  everyone. What should I do? 
is the only carbon-negative      Going to an academic conference  [Manually Authored – Writing] I
country on Earth, with strict    for the first time may seem like am planning to start a book club
environmental laws and cultural  a bewildering experience, but if with some friends. Can you write
norms that preserve its stunning done right, conferences are a    an email invitation for the same?
natural landscape. For similar   wonderful opportunity to         Here is an example email
reasons, Bhutan was one of the   brainstorm with experts from     invitation for a book club: 
last countries to introduce      around the world, present your   Subject: Join me for a book club!
television in 1999, and has no   work and get feedback, and make  Hi [Friend’s Name], how are you? 
traffic lights to this day. •    new friends. Here are some tips  I’m starting a book club with
There are currently few          for improving your conference    some friends, and I’d love to
territories on Earth that are    experience: • Reach out in       have you join us! The book club
unclaimed by any sovereign state advance to people who have       is a casual and fun way to read
(terra nullius). One example is  inspired your work. […] • Show   and discuss books that we love or
Bir Tawil, along the border      curiosity about other people’s   want to learn more about, and
between Egypt and Sudan, which   work. […] • Sign up for student  also make new friends. We plan to
was created by a discrepancy     volunteer […] • Ask your advisor meet more-or-less once a month. 
between borders drawn in 1899    to introduce you […] • At the    We’re thinking of having our
and 1902. The territory remains  same time, try to socialize      first meeting on [Date & Time].
unclaimed by either country,     outside of your lab […]          Could that work for you? Would
because it would entail          Ultimately, it is important to   love to see you there! Thanks, 
forfeiting the much larger       remember that every              [Your Name]
Halaib Triangle, which is        first-conference attendee is
claimed by both countries. Bir   probably feeling a bit shy too,
Tawil has no settled population, and that taking the first step
but the land is used by Bedouins in starting a conversation will
who roam the area. • The         almost always be met with a big
antipode of any spot on Earth    smile!
[…]


Figure 10: Training examples from different sources. Top row: examples mined from community Q&A. 
Bottom row: manually-authored examples. The blue text is the prompt. The gray ellipsis […]
indicates that the response was trimmed to fit this page, but the actual training example is
longer.

Appendix B Anticorrelation between Perplexity and Generation Quality

When fine-tuning LIMA, we observe that perplexity on held-out Stack Exchange data (2,000 examples)
negatively correlates with the model’s ability to produce quality responses. To quantify this
manual observation, we evaluate model generations using ChatGPT, following the methodology
described in Section 5. Figure 9 shows that as perplexity rises with more training steps – which is
typically a negative sign that the model is overfitting – so does the quality of generations
increase. Lacking an intrinsic evaluation method, we thus resort to manual checkpoint selection
using a small 50-example validation set.

Appendix C Human Annotation

Figure 11 shows the human annotation interface we used to collect preference judgments. Annotators
were asked to exercise empathy and imagine that they were the original prompters.

Imagine that you have a super-intelligent AI assistant, and that you require help with the
following question. Which answer best satisfies your needs?
Question:  <QUESTION>
Answer A: <ANSWER A>                                                                     Answer B: 
                                                                                         <ANSWER B>
Comparing these two answers, which answer is better? ◼\mdblksquare Answer A is           
significantly better. ◼\mdblksquare Answer B is significantly better. ◼\mdblksquare 
Neither is significantly better.


Figure 11: Human annotation interface.

Appendix D ChatGPT Score

Automatically evaluating generative models is a difficult problem. For ablation experiments
(Section 5), we use ChatGPT (GPT-3.5 Turbo) to evaluate model outputs on a 6-point Likert score
given the prompt in Figure 12.

You are evaluating a response that has been submitted for a particular task, using a specific set
of standards. Below is the data: [BEGIN DATA] *** [Task]: {task} *** [Submission]: {submission} ***
[Criterion]: helpfulness: "1": "Not helpful - The generated text is completely irrelevant, unclear,
or incomplete. It does not provide any useful information to the user." "2": "Somewhat helpful -
The generated text has some relevance to the user’s question, but it may be unclear or incomplete.
It provides only partial information, or the information provided may not be useful for the user’s
needs." "3": "Moderately helpful - The generated text is relevant to the user’s question, and it
provides a clear and complete answer. However, it may lack detail or explanation that would be
helpful for the user." "4": "Helpful - The generated text is quite relevant to the user’s question,
and it provides a clear, complete, and detailed answer. It offers additional information or
explanations that are useful for the user. However, some of the points of the response are somewhat
repetitive or could be combined for greater clarity and concision" "5": "Very helpful - The
generated text is highly relevant to the user’s question, and it provides a clear, complete, and
detailed answer. It offers additional information, explanations, or analogies that are not only
useful but also insightful and valuable to the user. However, the structured of the response is not
well-organized and there is no clear progression or logical sequence of different points in the
response." "6": "Highly helpful - The generated text provides a clear, complete, and detailed
answer. It offers additional information or explanations that are not only useful but also
insightful and valuable to the user. The response is also in a logical and easy-to-follow manner by
explicitly using headings, bullet points, or numbered lists to break up the information and make it
easier to read." *** [END DATA] Does the submission meet the criterion? First, write out in a step
by step manner your reasoning about the criterion to be sure that your conclusion is correct. Avoid
simply stating the correct answers at the outset. Then print the choice only from “1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6” (without quotes or punctuation) on its own line corresponding to the correct answer. At the end,
repeat just the selected choice again by itself on a new line.


Figure 12: Prompt for ChatGPT evaluation with a 6-scale Likert score. The placeholders "task" and
"submission" will be replaced by specific details from the actual case being evaluated.

Appendix E Generating Text with Complex Structure

In our preliminary experiments, we find that although LIMA can respond to many questions in our
development set well, it cannot consistently respond to questions that specify the structures of
the answer well, e.g. summarizing an article into bullet points or writing an article consisting of
several key elements. Hence, we investigate whether adding a few training examples in this vein can
help LIMA generalize to prompts with unseen structural requirements. We added six examples with
various formatting constraints, such as generating a product page that includes Highlights, About
the Product, and How to Use or generating question-answer pairs based on a given article.

After training with these six additional examples, we test the model on a few questions with format
constraints and observe that LIMA responses greatly improve. We present two examples in Figure 13,
from which we can see that LIMA fails to generate proper answers without structure-oriented
training examples (left column), but it can generate remarkably complex responses such as a
marketing plan even though we do not have any marketing plan examples in our data (right column).

   LIMA w/o 6 Format Constraint Examples (994                   LIMA (1,000 Examples)
                    Examples)
[Marketing Plan (Out of Distribution)] I want to start a local coffee shop. Create a marketing plan
with the following elements: Marketing Goals and Objectives, Define Target Audience, Research
Marketing Tactics, Plan Marketing Tactics and Develop Your Timeline and Budget.
Coffee Shop Marketing Plan Executive Summary The  
following marketing plan for Java Jolt Coffee Bar Here’s a marketing plan for your local coffee
outlines an aggressive approach to establishing a shop. Marketing Goals and Objectives • Increase
thriving coffee shop business in downtown         awareness of our brand among consumers […] • 
Pittsburgh. Java Jolt will capitalize on the      Drive foot traffic […] during slow business hours
popularity of specialty coffees and the growing   […] • Build relationships with influencers in our
demand for WiFi hot spots by offering a           community who […] Define Target Audience Our
comfortable environment where customers can enjoy target audiences include: • Residents of the
premium coffee drinks while taking advantage of   neighborhood surrounding our coffee shop • Office
free Internet access. Market research indicates   workers near our coffee shop • Students at nearby
that there is a significant opportunity for a new schools We will focus our marketing efforts on
coffee bar located in the heart of the downtown   these audiences because they are most likely to
business district. Market trends suggest that     become regular customers at our […] Research
consumers are willing to pay a higher price for   Marketing Tactics Here are some marketing tactics
quality specialty coffees served in a welcoming   that we could use to reach to reach our target
atmosphere. Additionally, many office workers and audiences and achieve our goals: • Host events at
students living in the area do not have easy      our coffee shop that appeal to our target
access to high-speed Internet service, presenting audiences (e.g., open mic nights for students or
an additional revenue stream for the coffee bar.  networking events […] • Offer discounts during
This marketing plan includes the following        slow business hours to entice […] • […] Plan
elements: • Market Research supporting the need   Marketing Tactics Here’s how we will implement
for a new coffee shop in the target location •    the marketing tactics above: • Events: We will
Detailed Description of the products and services host one event per month at our coffee shop. For
offered by Java Jolt • Target Market Analysis     each event, we will send out email invitations 
identifying the primary customer segments for     […] • Discounts: Every Monday through Thursday
Java Jolt • Marketing Strategy including pricing  from 3pm–6pm, we will offer $1 off any drink
decisions, promotional activities, and ways to    purchase. To promote […] • Local partnerships: We
differentiate Java Jolt from competitors •        will reach out to five local businesses and
Implementation Plan detailing the actions         schools to ask if we can leave stacks of coupons 
necessary to launch Java Jolt successfully •      […] • Social media: […] • Reviews: […] Develop
Budget allocating funds to each component of the  Your Timeline and Budget This is what our
marketing plan A comprehensive marketing plan has marketing timeline looks like: • Month 1: Launch
been developed based on extensive research into   email newsletter and social media accounts • 
the local market conditions, consumer trends, and Month 2: Start distributing coupons at […] • […] 
competitive landscape. With its unique            Here’s the budget for each marketing activity: • 
combination of premium coffee drinks and wireless Email newsletter: $50/month for MailChimp
Internet access, Java Jolt will quickly become a  subscription • Social media: $100/month for paid
favorite destination for people seeking a         ads […] • […]
relaxing environment to socialize, study, or
conduct business.
[Summarization into Bullet Points (In Distribution)] Can you summarize this message into bullet
points? Gradually slowing job gains and a growing labor force in March […] Mr. Biden said […]. More
Americans joined the labor force, […] this spring that he will seek re-election.
Though the unemployment rate fell to its lowest   
level since May 1970, at 4.8 percent, Mr. Biden
still faces an economy that leaves many Americans Here are the main points from the text: • Job
feeling left behind. Many working-class […] Mr.   creation slowed to 236,000 for the month of
Biden’s challenge will be persuading those voters March, which is close to the level needed to
that the economic picture has […] His opponents   stabilize the economy and prices. • More
have already begun painting a bleak portrait of   Americans joined the labor force, and wage gains
the economy, arguing that most Americans have not fell slightly, both of which should help cool
benefited from the president’s policies. “The     inflation. • The report underscores the political
March jobs report shows continued solid job       tensions facing President Biden ahead of his
growth but also indicates that we must do         expected announcement that he will seek
better,” said Representative Nancy Pelosi of      re-election.
California, the Democratic leader in the House. 
[…]


Figure 13: Model outputs from test prompts that ask the model to generate according to specified
structures. The gray ellipsis […] indicates that the response was trimmed to fit this page, but the
generated text is actually longer.

Experimental support, please view the build logs for errors. Generated by L A T E xml [LOGO] .

Instructions for reporting errors

We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility
and mobile support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and
rendering, choose any of the methods listed below:

  • Click the "Report Issue" ( ) button, located in the page header.

Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.

Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and
reporting rendering errors we may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML
versions for all readers, because disability should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank
you for your continued support in championing open access for all.

Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML
maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.

We gratefully acknowledge support from our major funders, member institutions, , and all
contributors.
About · Help · Contact · Subscribe · Copyright · Privacy · Accessibility · Operational Status
(opens in new tab)
Major funding support from
Simons Foundation Simons Foundation International Schmidt Sciences
 
