source: https://arxiv.org/html/2602.00929
arxiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.00929
note: HTML dump via w3m; not a PDF.
========================================================================

Report GitHub Issue

×
Title: [                    ]

Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:

Description: [                    ]
Submit without GitHub Submit in GitHub
[smileybone] arXiv is now an independent nonprofit! Learn more ×
arXiv logo Back to arXiv
Why HTML? Report Issue Back to Abstract Download PDF   

 1. Abstract
 2. 1 Introduction
 3. 2 Background
     1. 2.1 Theory-based Reinforcement Learning
     2. 2.2 TheoryCoder
 4. 3 Method: TheoryCoder-2
     1. 3.1 Learning Abstractions
     2. 3.2 Reusing and Growing the Library of Abstractions
 5. 4 Experiments
     1. 4.1 Evaluating Abstraction Learning and Reuse in Simple Environments
     2. 4.2 Transferring abstractions to harder problems
 6. 5 Discussion
 7. 6 Related Work
 8. 7 Conclusion
 9. References
10. A Language Model Prompts
11. B Results and Outputs

License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.00929v1 [cs.AI] 31 Jan 2026

Learning Abstractions for Hierarchical Planning in Program-Synthesis Agents

Zergham Ahmed Affiliation: Harvard University Correspondence to: zerghamahmed@g.harvard.edu    
Kazuki Irie Affiliation: Harvard University    Joshua B. Tenenbaum Affiliation: MIT    Christopher
J. Bates Affiliation: Institute for Human and Machine Cognition    Samuel J. Gershman Affiliation: 
Harvard University Affiliation: Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial
Intelligence at Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA

Abstract

Humans learn abstractions and use them to plan efficiently to quickly generalize across tasks—an
ability that remains challenging for state-of-the-art large language model (LLM) agents and deep
reinforcement learning (RL) systems. Inspired by the cognitive science of how people form
abstractions and intuitive theories of their world knowledge, Theory-Based RL (TBRL) systems, such
as TheoryCoder, exhibit strong generalization through effective use of abstractions. However, they
heavily rely on human-provided abstractions and sidestep the abstraction-learning problem. We
introduce TheoryCoder-2, a new TBRL agent that leverages LLMs’ in-context learning ability to
actively learn reusable abstractions rather than relying on hand-specified ones, by synthesizing
abstractions from experience and integrating them into a hierarchical planning process. We conduct
experiments on diverse environments, including BabyAI, Minihack and VGDL games like Sokoban. We
find that TheoryCoder-2 is significantly more sample-efficient than baseline LLM agents augmented
with classical planning domain construction, reasoning-based planning, and prior program-synthesis
agents such as WorldCoder. TheoryCoder-2 is able to solve complex tasks that the baselines fail,
while only requiring minimal human prompts, unlike prior TBRL systems.

Keywords: 

Machine Learning, ICML

1 Introduction

A hallmark of human intelligence is the ability to plan hierarchically by combining abstract
representations with a low-level world model (Koedinger and Anderson, 1990; Balaguer et al., 2016;
Tomov et al., 2020; Correa et al., 2023). At an early age, infants understand abstract predicates
like containment and support (Casasola and Cohen, 2002); these representations form the foundation
of later skill development that enables humans to predict, manipulate, and plan in complex domains.
For example, a representation of containment is essential for constructing an abstract plan to pour
juice into a cup, which can then be combined with a low-level model of biomechanics and physics to
construct a concrete plan grounded in the physical world.

Despite impressive progress, modern artificial intelligence (AI) systems still struggle to achieve
comparable fluency with abstract planning. Taking inspiration from cognitive science (Gopnik and
Meltzoff, 1997; Gerstenberg and Tenenbaum, 2017; Lake et al., 2017), recent work on “theory-based
reinforcement learning” (TBRL) systems have sought to close this gap by endowing AI agents with
human-like world models (“theories”) that are object-oriented, relational, and causal (Tsividis et
al., 2021; Tang et al., 2025). The most advanced system of this kind, TheoryCoder (Ahmed et al.,
2025), learns a low-level world model which is then combined with high-level abstractions to
support hierarchical planning. The performance and sample efficiency of TheoryCoder on complex
video games dramatically outstrips both deep reinforcement learning (RL) and large language model
(LLM) agents. TheoryCoder uses language models as a key component of its architecture, to translate
past experience into inferred world models. By harnessing LLMs in this way, TheoryCoder leverages
their associative memory and analogical retrieval capabilities. As a result, it achieves much
higher robustness and computational efficiency than either pure LLM agents or traditional
hierarchical planners on their own. Subsequently, TheoryCoder constructs symbolic models for
hierarchical plannings as opposed to using them as end-to-end agents.

The main limitation of TheoryCoder is its reliance on hand-coded abstractions, which substantially
limits its scope of application. For example, in order to tackle any new domain, a human would
first need to think about the abstractions relevant to it and then write code for them. Without
abstract plans, TheoryCoder would need to rely on largely random actions in order to build its
low-level world model, which would diminish the efficiency that was afforded by the abstractions
and their transferability. Here we address this core limitation by implementing automated learning
of abstract concepts. Our approach allows the agent not only to construct and manipulate
abstractions, but also to transfer them to new domains and ground them effectively and
instantaneously, with no domain adaptation required. This enables the system to learn a capacity
for hierarchical planning that generalizes, and thereby rapidly solves complex, novel tasks in a
way that emulates key algorithmic aspects of human learning and abstraction (Tomov et al., 2020).
The resulting method, TheoryCoder-2, is a TBRL agent capable of synthesizing high-level
abstractions in the form of “planning domain definition language” (PDDL; Ghallab et al. (1998))
operators, while requiring minimal human guidance in the form of initial prompts and examples.

We conduct experiments on a few closely related video game description language (VGDL) games (
Schaul, 2013), including Sokoban, as well as BabyAI (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019) and Minihack
(Samvelyan et al., 2021) environments. We compare our method to several baselines based on LLMs
augmented with classical planning domain construction (Liu et al., 2023a; Guan et al., 2023;
Smirnov et al., 2024) and reasoning-based planning (Yao et al., 2023b; Wei et al., 2022; Yao et
al., 2023a), as well as previously proposed program-synthesis agents such as WorldCoder (Tang et
al., 2025).

We demonstrate that TheoryCoder-2 achieves substantial improvements in both sample-efficiency and
generalization over the baselines: it can successfully solve complex versions of the tasks that the
baselines struggle with. Overall, this represents a significant improvement in the applicability
and generality of the TBRL approach, towards the long-term goal of building AI systems that learn
and think like humans.

2 Background

2.1 Theory-based Reinforcement Learning

Theory-Based Reinforcement Learning (TBRL) is a paradigm in which an agent uses an explicit,
program-like model of its environment and search algorithms to plan and solve problems. Unlike
traditional model-based RL methods, which either encode dynamics of the environment as tabular
transition models (Sutton, 1990; Kaelbling et al., 1996; Kaelbling et al., 1998) or approximate
them with deep neural networks (Schmidhuber, 1990; Schmidhuber, 2015; Pascanu et al., 2017; Weber
et al., 2017; Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2020), TBRL systems represent the causal
interactions between objects directly in the form of symbolic programs that describe how the
environment works. TBRL is inspired by the cognitive theory in the sense that these programs are
the theories corresponding to the abstract intuitive theories of the world that people learn and
use for planning and problem solving. These systems are able to solve problems without having to
rely on random exploration, since they try to uncover the causal relationships that have not been
captured by their model. We provide a more concrete and formal description in the next Sec. 2.2.

The earliest concrete TBRL system, EMPA (“Exploring, Modeling, and Planning Agent”; Tsividis et al.
(2021)), represented the environment using a domain-specific language, VGDL (Schaul, 2013), and
employed Bayesian inference to generate them. EMPA was computationally slow due to the cost of
inference; and VGDL itself was limiting, since it only allows expressing pairwise collision rules,
making it difficult to scale beyond simple Atari-style domains.

More recently, TheoryCoder (Ahmed et al., 2025) instantiated a more general version of TBRL by
representing theories as Python programs—a general-purpose programming language, unlike
VGDL—synthesized using large language models (LLMs; Brown and others (2020)). LLMs enable fast
approximate inference in TheoryCoder, thereby making it faster than EMPA. Like EMPA, TheoryCoder
interacts with environments to collect state transitions to guide program synthesis. Unlike EMPA,
TheoryCoder has a bi-level world model to support efficient planning and rapid transfer learning,
both of which were demonstrated in the complex puzzle game, Baba is You (Oy, 2019; Cloos et al.,
2024), among others. Further technical details of TheoryCoder are provided in the next Sec. 2.2.

Despite these promising results, TheoryCoder is still limited in that it i) is only applicable to
environments that can be encoded through object-oriented coordinate-based representations, and ii)
heavily relies on hand-engineered abstractions, limiting scalability.

The main technical contribution of our method (Sec. 3) is to address the latter, by enabling the
TBRL system to learn abstractions automatically in a few-shot manner. This capability allows TBRL
agents to expand its repertoire of theories in entirely new domains, capturing the human ability of
gradually growing a library of reusable structured concepts, without manual intervention. We show
our approach substantially improves computational efficiency (in terms of tokens used) over the
baselines of existing LLM-based agents, and accelerates learning speed, making it a stronger step
toward scalable, human-like abstraction learning and problem solving through TBRL.

2.2 TheoryCoder

Here we describe the mathematical details of TheoryCoder (Ahmed et al., 2025), which we directly
build on. The problem is formulated as follows. The environment is modeled by a transition function
T:𝒮×𝒜→𝒮T:\mathcal{S}\times\mathcal{A}\rightarrow\mathcal{S} over state space 𝒮\mathcal{S} and
action space 𝒜\mathcal{A}. Let KK denote a positive integer. The agent’s objective is to find a
plan π=(a1,…,aN)\pi=(a_{1},\ldots,a_{N}) with ai∈𝒜a_{i}\in\mathcal{A} for all ii from 11 to NN,
that minimizes cumulative cost ∑n=1Nc⁡(sn,an)\sum_{n=1}^{N}c(s_{n},a_{n}), where c⁡(s,a)=Kc(s,a)=K
for non-goal states and c⁡(s∗,a)=0c(s^{\ast},a)=0 at the goal state s∗s^{\ast}. Thus, an optimal
plan corresponds to the shortest action sequence from the start state to the goal.

System overview. TheoryCoder is an agent consisting of five components: an LLM, two planners (for
high-level and low-level planning, respectively) and a set of PDDL program files representing a
library of abstract states and actions (which are used by the high-level planner), as well as a
Python program file representing the world model which approximates the transition function of the
environment (which is used by the low-level planner). The LLM and planner components are
pre-specified when defining the system, and remain fixed. Essentially, learning in TheoryCoder
consists of synthesizing these program files (using the LLM) while interacting with the
environment; planning consists in executing the classic PDDL planning system and search algorithms
using these program files. The complementary roles of these program files are further described
below.

High-level abstractions. The PDDL program files in TheoryCoder contain the agent’s current library
of high-level abstract domain theories.

To be more specific about their structure, these PDDL program files consist of a “domain” file and
a “problem” file. The domain file specifies abstract actions (called “operators”, e.g., “open
door”) and their preconditions/effects, as well as abstract states (e.g., “door unlocked”) which
are represented by Boolean predicates that capture task-relevant features. The problem file
specifies the initial state and goal conditions for a particular task. Together, these files are
taken as input by a classical planner (we use Fast Downward (Helmert, 2006)), which outputs a plan
(a sequence of operators, i.e., high-level actions) that achieves the goal from the initial state,
if one exists. In the original TheoryCoder, these PDDL files are assumed to be given by the human
engineer. Similarly, EMPA depended on a set of VGDL abstractions that it was provided. This
dependency on human engineered abstractions is the limitation we address.

Low-level dynamics world model. TheoryCoder maintains an additional low-level world model in the
form of a Python program T^\hat{T} , which represents the environment’s transition function (world
model). Its goal is to fully predict the effects of low-level actions in the raw state space. The
low-level world model is initialized as an empty function, which predicts no changes in state as a
result of any action. When the agent first begins a new task, it is allowed a small amount of
random exploration in the low-level action space (e.g. “up”, “down”, “left”, “right”), which
generates an initial set of observations. Prediction errors accumulate since the world model is
empty. This prediction error (in the form of actions and their state predictions) are sent in a
prompt to the LLM along with the current world model. The role of the LLM is to revise the world
model until these prediction errors are fixed (up to a given budget). As more tasks are encountered
within a domain, the world model will accumulate prediction errors and the LLM will be prompted to
fix these errors.

Bi-level planning. Once the PDDL domain and problem files are generated, the high-level planner (
Helmert, 2006, Fast Downward;) generates a symbolic plan in terms of abstract operators. The
low-level planner (in this case breadth-first search) uses the learned transition function T^\hat
{T} to map each operator to a sequence of primitive actions. A bridging “checker” function ensures
consistency by verifying that the low-level states indeed satisfy the intended high-level predicate
effects. This is done through Python boolean predicate classifiers which are also learned by our
system. This hierarchical framing mirrors how humans plan: abstract operators (e.g., “open door”)
and predicates (e.g., “door unlocked”) guide planning at the symbolic level, while grounding them
requires concrete motor actions (e.g., “up”, “left”, etc.).

3 Method: TheoryCoder-2

We extend TheoryCoder by enabling it to autonomously learn abstractions (i.e., synthesize the PDDL
files) and grow a library of abstract concepts/skills through a sequence of episodes interacting
with various environments. We refer to this improved TBRL system as TheoryCoder-2. Here we describe
the details of the abstraction learning process of TheoryCoder-2 via LLM in-context learning (Sec. 
3.1) and the overall idea of gradually growing the library of abstractions through a curriculum
(Sec. 3.2). An algorithmic description is presented in Algorithm 1.


Algorithm 1 TheoryCoder-2
1:  Input: LLM, initial state s0s_{0}, action space 𝒜\mathcal{A}, few-shot examples F​SFS
2:  Output: Low-level plan π=⟨a1,a2,…,aN⟩\pi=\langle a_{1},a_{2},\dots,a_{N}\rangle
3:  D,𝒫←LLM​(s0,F​S)D,\mathcal{P}\leftarrow\text{LLM}(s_{0},FS)
4:  ℛp←∅,ℛa←∅\mathcal{R}_{p}\leftarrow\emptyset,\;\mathcal{R}_{a}\leftarrow\emptyset
5:  ℛrandom←\mathcal{R}_{\text{random}}\leftarrow Generate transitions with random actions
6:  T^←LLM​(s0,𝒜,ℛrandom,D,𝒫)\hat{T}\leftarrow\text{LLM}(s_{0},\mathcal{A},\mathcal{R}_{\text
{random}},D,\mathcal{P})
7:  𝒢←LLM​(s0,F​S,D,𝒫)\mathcal{G}\leftarrow\text{LLM}(s_{0},FS,D,\mathcal{P})
8:  ΠH←Fast-Downward​(D,𝒫)\Pi_{H}\leftarrow\text{Fast-Downward}(D,\mathcal{P})
9:  for each grounded operator ωk¯∈ΠH\underline{\omega_{k}}\in\Pi_{H} do
10:   πk←BFS⁡(s0,T^,ωk¯)\pi_{k}\leftarrow\mathrm{BFS}(s_{0},\hat{T},\underline{\omega_{k}})
11:   Store (s,a,s′,ωk¯)(s,a,s^{\prime},\underline{\omega_{k}}) for all transitions in πk\pi_{k} in
ℛp\mathcal{R}_{p}
12:   π←π∪πk\pi\leftarrow\pi\cup\pi_{k}
13:   for each a∈πka\in\pi_{k} do
14:    Store (s,a,s′,ωk¯)(s,a,s^{\prime},\underline{\omega_{k}}) in ℛa\mathcal{R}_{a}
15:   end for
16:  end for
17:  if EFF​(ωK−1¯)\text{EFF}(\underline{\omega_{K-1}}) holds in s′s^{\prime} after executing π\pi 
then
18:   return π\pi
19:  else
20:   if ℛp≠ℛa\mathcal{R}_{p}\neq\mathcal{R}_{a} then
21:    T^←LLM​(T^,ℛp,ℛa)\hat{T}\leftarrow\text{LLM}(\hat{T},\mathcal{R}_{p},\mathcal{R}_{a})
22:   else
23:    ΠE←Exploration​(s0,D)\Pi_{E}\leftarrow\text{Exploration}(s_{0},D)
24:    goto Line 8
25:   end if
26:  end if

3.1 Learning Abstractions

Unlike the original TheoryCoder, which relied on hand-engineered PDDL files defining abstract
operators and predicates, TheoryCoder-2 leverages LLMs’ in-context learning ability to synthesize
such files on its own. In this process, the only system input we need to hand-engineer is the 
initial prompt—a natural language description of the final goal of the environment and very simple
examples illustrating what it means to learn abstract operators (e.g., eat with the precondition 
not eaten and the effect eaten) based on a toy problem; the corresponding example can be found in
Box A and the complete initial prompt in Box A in the Appendix.

These examples are designed to be minimal; they are unrelated to the actual environment the agent
interacts with, serving only as templates for how abstractions can be represented. They are crucial
for guiding the LLM to synthesize abstractions at the appropriate level—neither too granular nor
too coarse (a challenge for current LLMs when given full autonomy).

3.2 Reusing and Growing the Library of Abstractions

Our experiments tested the ability of TheoryCoder-2 to build up a library of reusable abstract
concepts through a sequence of “episodes” interacting with different environments. To do this, we
designed episodes containing one or more environments, grouped together by similarity, and ordered
by difficulty. We also constructed ablations by shuffling the ordering of the curriculum.

Within each episode, once the agent has learned the operators (zero-shot), it then learns a Python
world model exactly as in the original TheoryCoder (Sec. 2.2). Unlike TheoryCoder, it also learns
Python functions to ground predicates’ semantics in a given environment. (Previously, these were
provided along with the PDDL abstractions.)

That is, the agent learns the predicate classifiers by generating Python programs. These
classifiers operate on the raw state and return a Boolean indicating whether the predicate is true.

From the second environment onward within an episode, agents attempt to reuse any
previously-learned abstractions and add to them as necessary.


Figure 1: Comparison of agent–environment interaction between methods. WorldCoder and LLM + P both
fall under the LLM + Planner category.

4 Experiments

Our experiments aim to answer the following set of questions: Can TheoryCoder-2 successfully learn
abstract states and actions? Are learned abstractions reusable across different environments? Does
reuse improve sample efficiency on new problems? How well does the resulting system perform on
challenging tasks that are nontrivial for existing LLM agents?

To answer these questions, we evaluate various properties of TheoryCoder-2 and other agents in the
VGDL-based Labyrinth and Maze, as well as Sokoban (Sec. 4.1), BabyAI environments, and finally
Minihack (Sec. 4.2).

Evaluation metrics. We use the following metrics to evaluate agents: token cost (the number of
tokens consumed by each agent measures sample efficiency), compute time (Wall-clock compute time
measures the practical runtime of each agent), and solution rate (the proportion of tasks (game
levels) successfully solved on the first attempt measures agent performance).

We compare TheoryCoder-2 against the following baselines, including variation of TheoryCoder-2 in
which we ablate certain components. All of these agents use LLMs in some capacity (either the
non-reasoning model 4o or the reasoning model o4-mini).

LLM + π\pi. A reasoning-only model that generates plans directly in terms of primitive actions,
without explicit abstractions or an executable world model. Here, we test o4-mini (OpenAI, 2025),
with high, medium, and low reasoning effort (when not indicated, we use the ‘high’ variant).
Additionally, we test GPT-4o, a non-reasoning model.

LLM + P (Liu et al., 2023a). Uses an LLM to generate PDDL domain and problem files for each task
given the current observation and a few-shot prompt. A planner produces a plan, which an LLM then
converts into a sequence of actions that are executable in the environment. We use o4-mini with
high reasoning effort as the PDDL synthesizer model, since lower-effort modes struggled even on the
earlier levels—likely because LLMs are less reliable at producing PDDL than Python code.

WorldCoder (Tang et al., 2025).The agent synthesizes a Python program representing the transition
function. This program is used by a low-level planner to generate actions. Just as for
TheoryCoder-2, we use GPT-4o as the synthesizer and BFS as the planner. WorldCoder differs from
TheoryCoder-2 in that planning and world modeling is not done hierarchically. WorldCoder is more
similar to LLM + P in that aspect, as LLM + P is also modeling the world at a low-level only.

TheoryCoder-2. Our full system, which synthesizes PDDL operators using GPT-4o for high-level
planning, along with Python versions of the predicates and a Python transition function for
low-level dynamics, enabling grounded abstraction learning and reuse across environments.
TheoryCoder-2 is different from the other agents since it models the world hierarchically by
synthesizing high level abstractions in PDDL and a low-level Python transition model. It uses the
PDDL operators for high-level planning and the low-level model for low-level planning.

Oracle. Uses hand-engineered abstractions, serving as a reference to compare the quality of
abstractions learned by TheoryCoder-2. We also evaluate two ablated variations:

TC - P. Removes the executable abstractions and Python world model. The LLM directly outputs
abstractions and high-level plans, and then is prompted to convert its high level plan into
actions. It is a form of chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022), encouraging the LLM to
think at a high level first and then output a low level plan.

TC - C. Removes curriculum learning. It starts each episode with blank abstractions and transition
function. It has to synthesize all the abstractions and a transition function for the current
level.

Refer to caption
Figure 2: An illustration of the curriculum used in our experiments. A curriculum is a sequence of
episodes in which each episode contains one or more environments/games. The sequence of the first
episode (Labyrinth) and the second one (Maze, and Sokoban) is studied in Experiment 1 (Sec. 4.1),
while the entire sequence is used in Experiment 2 (Sec. 4.2). In experiment 3 (Minihack), we use a
separate curriculum. The blue arrows indicate the abstractions that TheoryCoder-2 learned.

4.1 Evaluating Abstraction Learning and Reuse in Simple Environments

The goal of this experiment is to evaluate the feasibility of abstraction learning and its
reusability in our agent. Here we evaluate the agents using Labyrinth, Maze, and Sokoban. The first
segment of Figure 2 illustrates this setting. These tasks are navigation-style VGDL games that
primarily involve learning and reusing abstractions to “move to” a certain position.

Results in the top part of Table 1 show the token cost and whether the agents successfully solved
each of the problems. First, we observe that TheoryCoder-2 is able to learn the key abstraction
𝚖𝚘𝚟𝚎​_​𝚝𝚘\mathtt{move\_to} and solve the task. (Note the LLM named this operator 𝚖𝚘𝚟𝚎𝚘𝚗𝚝𝚘𝚙\mathtt
{moveontop} and the corresponding code for the abstraction is shown in Box 4.1 below.)

Second, we observe that TheoryCoder-2 was able to reuse this operator in two new environments, Maze
and Sokoban. In terms of efficiency, the simple LLM + π\pi baseline is the most efficient agent on
these simple environments, while the second best is TheoryCoder-2 outperforming the two advanced
LLM agents, LLM + P and WorldCoder. Finally, we note that all systems were able to solve these
simple problems.

Box 1: Example of a learned abstraction ⬇ (:action moveontop :parameters (?obj1 - object ?obj2 - 
object) :precondition (not (ontop ?obj1 ?obj2)) :effect (ontop ?obj1 ?obj2) )


Table 1: Token cost across models (lower is better). Cells are highlighted inblueif the
corresponding agent failed to solve the task.

                           TheoryCoder-2           Baselines
Task (Game)                Full    TC - P  TC - C  LLM + π\pi LLM + P WorldCoder
Labyrinth                  21,378  24,510  21,378  5,173      28,931  56,360
Maze                       19,737  23,186  21,236  3,518      24,396  56,085
Sokoban                    7,171   10,373  8,441   2,608      25,919  19,684
BabyAI
BabyAI (Pickup)            8,588   6,660   8,588   2,405      20,589  18,013
BabyAI (Unlock)            33,116  41,734  33,116  5,705      50,071  97,938
BabyAI (Combine Skills 1)  1,961   54,277  44,725  40,960     41,515  119,330
BabyAI (Combined Skills 2) 2,528   53,376  45,175  49,973     59,003  120,200
BabyAI (Combined Skills 3) 2,454   53,064  45,017  29,791     55,078  120,375
Minihack
Minihack-5x5               5,163   7,671   5,163   1,115      12,595  8,144
Minihack-15x15             0       9,815   4,837   1,402      12,124  0
Minihack-Traps             0       14,326  5,007   9,110      29,712  0
Minihack-Monster           0       21,189  6,125   1,290      30,940  0
Minihack-WoD               19,433  21,932  19,433  4,176      52,434  62,165
Total for All Tasks        121,529 267,180 268,241 157,206    443,307 437,719

4.2 Transferring abstractions to harder problems

The purpose of this experiment is to test whether TheoryCoder-2 can gradually learn new
abstractions and reuse them in new environments, and whether that yields sample efficiency.

We first evaluate our agent on the curriculum of Sec. 4.1; we add three BabyAI levels in sequence: 
Pickup (single key), Unlock (key + door), and the Boss level. The two first environments are named
after the abstract skills needed to solve the corresponding task, and the last one is a multi-room
task requiring both picking-up and unlocking skills. For the Boss level, we generate three
instantiations with different layouts (based on three different seeds) in order to increase the
diversity of final combined-skill environments. Figure 2 provides an illustration of this
curriculum.

Table 1 (middle) shows the results. While all the agents solve the simple Pickup and Unlock
environments, many of them fail in the complex Boss level: more specifically, all agents failed in
“Combined Skills 2”, while only TheoryCoder-2 succeeded at both “Combined Skills 1” and “3”.
TheoryCoder-2 successfully learns abstractions (𝙿𝚒𝚌𝚔𝚞𝚙\mathtt{Pickup} and 𝚄𝚗𝚕𝚘𝚌𝚔\mathtt{Unlock})
from the two first levels and then composes them to solve the more complex Boss level tasks that
require using both of them.

Refer to caption
Figure 3: Success rate as a function of compute time, averaged across all games. The TC Family
represents TheoryCoder-2 and its variants. TheoryCoder and its ablations are able to solve more
tasks with less compute time than the reasoning models that use high reasoning effort. LLM + π\pi
is shown with three different reasoning efforts.

In terms of sample efficiency, TheoryCoder-2 allocates high computation for the first and the
second levels to learn the abstractions; but its token consumption dramatically drops on the Boss
level (from about 8500 and 33000 to around 2000), as it no longer needs to learn any new
abstractions if it reuses those learned in the previous level. Furthermore, it shows that
TheoryCoder-2 is able to compose these primitive abstractions to solve different variations of the
Boss levels that have different win conditions.

Finally, we evaluate our abstraction learning method in five Minihack environments. The bottom part
of Table 1 illustrates the effectiveness of abstraction transfer. TheoryCoder-2 learns an abstract
skill of move_to in Minihack-5x5 and then reuses it to solve the next three environments. As a
result, there is 0 token consumption for Minihack-15x15, Minihack-Traps, and Minihack-Monster.
WorldCoder also exhibits this trend, but failed at the hardest task, Minihack-WoD. In the 
Minihack-WoD environment, TheoryCoder-2 learns the attack abstraction, which allows it to shoot a
wand to kill an enemy. This abstraction demonstrates how compact operators that encompass multiple
concepts can be learned: picking up the wand, aiming it at the enemy and shooting it. The Minihack
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of zero-shot transfer of the abstractions as well as the
ability to learn single compact abstractions that encompass different actions.

Notably, even when the curriculum or planners is removed, TheoryCoder-2 is capable of solving the
task; that is, both components significantly contribute to improving the sample efficiency but not
to the performance. In Table 1, we see that even when curriculum learning is removed and
abstraction files are initialized with blank files, TheoryCoder-2 remains more compute efficient
than the other world modeling approaches: WorldCoder and LLM + P. By contrast, WorldCoder is very
costly, consuming more tokens than the raw LLM approach. On the more difficult environments, we
also observed that the PDDL programs generated by LLM + P frequently contained errors, leading to
invalid or unsolvable plans.

We further compare the runtime of these agents. Fig. 3 shows the success rate averaged over all
games in the curriculum and the average compute time. We observe that the fastest agents are the
low-effort LLM + π\pi baseline and the full TheoryCoder-2 with curriculum and planner. Notably,
even when curriculum learning is removed and TheoryCoder-2 is initialized with blank files, it
remains faster at synthesizing abstractions and solving levels than the o4-mini variants.

5 Discussion

Results summary. The results highlight several key advantages of TheoryCoder-2 over the baselines.
As shown in Fig. 3, TheoryCoder-2 and its ablations achieve the highest success rate. This stems
from the use of grounded abstractions, which reduce the likelihood of planning errors compared to
reasoning-only LLMs. While LLM + π\pi with high reasoning effort sometimes achieve comparable
solution rates, it does so at a higher token cost and much more compute time cost, making it
impractical for scalable or real-time use. On the BabyAI Boss level, o4-mini with high reasoning
effort often required around 3 minutes to return an answer. In contrast, TheoryCoder-2 invests
compute in simpler levels to learn reusable components of hierarchical world models, which then
accelerate learning and planning in harder environments. Moreover, by generating symbolic
abstractions, our agents can run highly efficient classical planning algorithms. The result is
efficiency gains in both token cost and runtime: symbolic planners typically terminate within a
second in the domains we explored here.

With the TC-P ablation, which both generated abstractions and planned in natural language instead
of code, we observed qualitative differences compared to the full model. For example, o4-mini with
high reasoning effort produced abstractions at a different level of granularity than our system,
often interleaving high-level operators with unnecessary low-level details. Thus, more strictly
enforcing clean separation of function between levels of the world model via code specifications
may have more general benefits for producing systematic thinking in LLM agents.

Our results suggest that the mixing in of low-level detail may be why TC-P takes longer to map out
plans, whereas TheoryCoder-2 invests just enough compute up front to synthesize an appropriate
world model. Once this model captures the “right” abstractions, it can serve as an adaptive compute
resource, allowing the agent to flexibly balance fast, reactive reasoning with slower, more
deliberate planning depending on the situation.

Overall, we found TheoryCoder-2’s learned abstractions to be of similar quality to the Oracle, the
hand-designed abstractions. While there is no systematic way to quantitatively evaluate the quality
of the abstractions learned (e.g., one could measure the string length of programs and ask how
compressed a particular abstraction is), qualitatively, we find that they yield similar performance
to the Oracle in Fig. 3 and have similar preconditions and effects.

Limitations and future directions. Despite the significant advances, TheoryCoder-2 still has
limitations, which we plan to address in future work. First, our approach assumes access to an
object-oriented, text-based state representation. While vision-language models have shown mixed
results for planning, they may serve as perception modules for extracting such representations in
simple environments. Scaling to more complex settings will require robust methods for object
discovery, tracking, and attribute inference. Second, extending beyond discrete domains to
continuous ones introduces new challenges (e.g., predicting continuous trajectories or collision
dynamics). Third, we noticed issues related to brittleness when learning the predicate classifiers,
which are critical for linking high and low levels of representation in the planner. In particular,
we noticed that certain symbolic state representations led to issues. For example, in BabyAI, we
originally represented open doors as ”open_door” and closed doors as ”closed_door”. In this case,
our method synthesized predicate functions that made incorrect assumptions - for instance that open
doors would be removed from the state dictionary. When we instead represented doors as an object
with boolean attributes for closed and locked, our method consistently produced correct predicate
classifiers.

Finally, we note that while LLMs could generate adequate abstractions given only an initial
observation for all the environments we used here, more challenging or less familiar environments
will likely require additional mechanisms to support trial-and-error learning for the PDDL
representations. This will be a focus of future work.

6 Related Work

LLMs for Planning and Synthesizing Policies. Many recent works have explored how LLMs can be used
for planning (Yao et al., 2023b; Hao et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023b; Wang et
al., 2023). A common approach is to provide the LLM with a text-based description of the
environment state as input and then query it to produce an action. After executing the action, the
resulting text-based state is fed back into the model, creating an interactive loop.
Vision-language models have also been applied in a similar manner (Waytowich et al., 2024; Paglieri
et al., 2024; Ruoss et al., 2025; Cloos et al., 2024), except that they are prompted with images of
the environment state rather than text-based descriptions.

Despite these advances, many frontier LLMs still struggle with spatial reasoning and are prone to
hallucinations. To mitigate these issues, some approaches augment LLM agents with external modules
or tools (Cao et al., 2025), fine-tune models on trajectory data (Gaven et al., 2024), incorporate
memory modules, or prompting techniques enabling the agent to better structure its reasoning over
time. We compared TheoryCoder-2 with agents that use the LLM as the implicit planner (Yao et al.,
2023b; Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023a). While such methods can enhance reasoning, they often
suffer from high compute costs, as reasoning models take considerable time to generate answers (
Hassid et al., 2025).

Program Synthesis. Several works have used program synthesis to build explicit world models of the
environment (Tang et al., 2025; Ahmed et al., 2025; Piriyakulkij et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025),
demonstrating improved reasoning capabilities (Gupta and Kembhavi, 2023) compared to standard large
language models. EMPA (Tsividis et al., 2021) also uses program synthesis, though it represented
the environment in VGDL rather than a general-purpose programming language. Wong et al. (2024)
showed that LLMs can be used to learn operators for simple language-instruction domains. Liu et al.
(2023a) used LLMs to generate PDDL files and showed that in-context learning examples are important
for quality generation. Other work has investigated using vision-language models to learn
predicates (Liang et al., 2025), but these methods relied on labeled images to guide object
identification, limiting their autonomy. In contrast, our approach targets the end-to-end problem
of generating both the goals and the abstractions needed for hierarchical planning (assuming access
to a text-based observation of the environment’s frame).

Abstraction Learning in RL. While our focus is on program-synthesis agents and directly comparable
LLM-based agents, abstraction learning and hierarchical planning have also been a longstanding
research topic in general reinforcement learning. Key concepts introduced in the options framework
(Sutton et al., 1999; Bacon et al., 2017), Feudal RL (Dayan and Hinton, 1992; Vezhnevets et al.,
2017), and sub-goal generation (Schmidhuber and Wahnsiedler, 1993; Bakker and Schmidhuber, 2004)
remain central in modern deep RL research, including in the offline imitation learning setting (
Shiarlis et al., 2018; Kipf et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2021; Gopalakrishnan et al., 2023). Similarly,
many recent methods have pushed the sample efficiency of purely neural network model-based RL (
Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Hafner et al., 2023), matching human learners’ efficiency in certain
domains (Ye et al., 2021). However, in general, deep RL methods still remain much less sample
efficient, and have lower generalization abilities, compared to neurosymbolic and program
synthesis-based agents as have been reported by prior work (Tang et al., 2025; Tsividis et al.,
2021). Here, our contribution was to push the current limitation of such a neurosymbolic approach.

7 Conclusion

We expanded the scope and efficiency of TBRL by enabling abstraction induction and reuse—a critical
step towards making TBRL free of human engineering. We experimentally demonstrated that a novel
TBRL system, TheoryCoder-2, is capable of gradually learning reusable abstractions, yielding both
improved sample efficiency and solution rates over several baseline LLM agents based on LLMs.
Future work will extend TBRL further to make it applicable to environments beyond those with
object-oriented, text-based state representations.

Software and Data

Our code is available at:
https://github.com/ZerghamAhmed/TheoryCoder.

Impact Statement

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many
potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted
here.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial
Intelligence, a Polymath Award from the Schmidt Sciences, and the Department of Defense MURI
program under ARO grant W911NF-231-0277.

References

  • Ahmed et al. (2025) Z. Ahmed, J. B. Tenenbaum, C. J. Bates, and S. J. Gershman Synthesizing
    world models for bilevel planning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR). Cited by:
    §1, §2.1, §2.2, §6.
  • Bacon et al. (2017) P. Bacon, J. Harb, and D. Precup The option-critic architecture. In Proc.
    AAAI Conf. on Artificial Intelligence, San Francisco, California, USA. Cited by: §6.
  • Bakker and Schmidhuber (2004) B. Bakker and J. Schmidhuber Hierarchical reinforcement learning
    based on subgoal discovery and subpolicy specialization. In Proc. Conf. on Intelligent
    Autonomous Systems, Amsterdam, Netherlands, pp. 438–445. Cited by: §6.
  • Balaguer et al. (2016) J. Balaguer, H. Spiers, D. Hassabis, and C. Summerfield Neural
    mechanisms of hierarchical planning in a virtual subway network. Neuron 90 (4), pp. 893–903. 
    Cited by: §1.
  • Brown et al. (2020) T. B. Brown et al. Language models are few-shot learners. In Proc. Advances
    in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Virtual only. Cited by: §2.1.
  • Cao et al. (2025) P. Cao, T. Men, W. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Li, X. Lin, D. Sui, Y. Cao, K. Liu, and
    J. Zhao Large language models for planning: a comprehensive and systematic survey. Preprint
    arXiv:2505.19683. Cited by: §6.
  • Casasola and Cohen (2002) M. Casasola and L. B. Cohen Infant categorization of containment,
    support and tight-fit spatial relationships. Developmental Science 5, pp. 247–264. Cited by: §1
    .
  • Chevalier-Boisvert et al. (2019) M. Chevalier-Boisvert, D. Bahdanau, S. Lahlou, L. Willems, C.
    Saharia, T. H. Nguyen, and Y. Bengio BabyAI: first steps towards grounded language learning
    with a human in the loop. In Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), Cited by: §1.
  • Cloos et al. (2024) N. Cloos, M. Jens, M. Naim, Y. Kuo, I. Cases, A. Barbu, and C. J. Cueva 
    Baba is AI: break the rules to beat the benchmark. In ICML 2024 Workshop on LLMs and Cognition,
    Cited by: §2.1, §6.
  • Correa et al. (2023) C. G. Correa, M. K. Ho, F. Callaway, N. D. Daw, and T. L. Griffiths Humans
    decompose tasks by trading off utility and computational cost. PLoS Computational Biology 19 (6
    ), pp. e1011087. Cited by: §1.
  • Dayan and Hinton (1992) P. Dayan and G. E. Hinton Feudal reinforcement learning. In Proc.
    Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 271–278. Cited by: §6.
  • Gaven et al. (2024) L. Gaven, C. Romac, T. Carta, S. Lamprier, O. Sigaud, and P. Oudeyer 
    SAC-glam: improving online rl for llm agents with soft actor-critic and hindsight relabeling. 
    Preprint arXiv:2410.12481. Cited by: §6.
  • Gerstenberg and Tenenbaum (2017) T. Gerstenberg and J. B. Tenenbaum Intuitive theories. In The
    Oxford Handbook of Causal Reasoning, Cited by: §1.
  • Ghallab et al. (1998) M. Ghallab, C. Knoblock, D. Wilkins, A. Barrett, D. Christianson, M.
    Friedman, C. Kwok, K. Golden, S. Penberthy, D. Smith, Y. Sun, and D. Weld PDDL - the planning
    domain definition language. Technical report AIPS. Cited by: §1.
  • Gopalakrishnan et al. (2023) A. Gopalakrishnan, K. Irie, J. Schmidhuber, and S. van Steenkiste 
    Unsupervised learning of temporal abstractions with slot-based transformers. Neural Computation
    35 (4), pp. 593–626. Cited by: §6.
  • Gopnik and Meltzoff (1997) A. Gopnik and A. Meltzoff Words, thoughts, and theories. MIT Press. 
    Cited by: §1.
  • Guan et al. (2023) L. Guan, K. Valmeekam, S. Sreedharan, and S. Kambhampati Leveraging
    pre-trained large language models to construct and utilize world models for model-based task
    planning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, pp. 79081–79094. Cited by: §1.
  • Gupta and Kembhavi (2023) T. Gupta and A. Kembhavi Visual programming: compositional visual
    reasoning without training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
    Pattern Recognition, pp. 14953–14962. Cited by: §6.
  • Ha and Schmidhuber (2018) D. Ha and J. Schmidhuber Recurrent world models facilitate policy
    evolution. Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). Cited by: §2.1.
  • Hafner et al. (2020) D. Hafner, T. P. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi Dream to control:
    learning behaviors by latent imagination. In Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 
    Virtual only. Cited by: §2.1.
  • Hafner et al. (2023) D. Hafner, J. Pasukonis, J. Ba, and T. Lillicrap Mastering diverse domains
    through world models. Preprint arXiv:2301.04104. Cited by: §6.
  • Hao et al. (2023) S. Hao, Y. Gu, H. Ma, J. J. Hong, Z. Wang, D. Z. Wang, and Z. Hu Reasoning
    with language model is planning with world model. In Proc. Conf. on Empirical Methods in
    Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Singapore. Cited by: §6.
  • Hassid et al. (2025) M. Hassid, G. Synnaeve, Y. Adi, and R. Schwartz Don’t overthink it.
    preferring shorter thinking chains for improved llm reasoning. Preprint arXiv:2505.17813. Cited
    by: §6.
  • Helmert (2006) M. Helmert The fast downward planning system. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
    Research 26, pp. 191–246. Cited by: §2.2, §2.2.
  • Kaelbling et al. (1998) L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. R. Cassandra Planning and acting
    in partially observable stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence 101 (1-2), pp. 99–134. 
    Cited by: §2.1.
  • Kaelbling et al. (1996) L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. W. Moore Reinforcement learning:
    a survey. Journal of artificial intelligence research 4, pp. 237–285. Cited by: §2.1.
  • Kipf et al. (2019) T. Kipf, Y. Li, H. Dai, V. F. Zambaldi, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, E.
    Grefenstette, P. Kohli, and P. W. Battaglia CompILE: compositional imitation learning and
    execution. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML), Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 3418–3428. 
    Cited by: §6.
  • Koedinger and Anderson (1990) K. R. Koedinger and J. R. Anderson Abstract planning and
    perceptual chunks: elements of expertise in geometry. Cognitive Science 14 (4), pp. 511–550. 
    Cited by: §1.
  • Lake et al. (2017) B. M. Lake, T. D. Ullman, J. B. Tenenbaum, and S. J. Gershman Building
    machines that learn and think like people. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 40, pp. e253. Cited
    by: §1.
  • Liang et al. (2025) Y. Liang, N. Kumar, H. Tang, A. Weller, J. B. Tenenbaum, T. Silver, J. F.
    Henriques, and K. Ellis VisualPredicator: learning abstract world models with neuro-symbolic
    predicates for robot planning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 
    Cited by: §6.
  • Liu et al. (2025) A. Z. Liu, X. Wang, J. Sansom, Y. Fu, J. Choi, S. Sohn, J. Kim, and H. Lee 
    Interactive and expressive code-augmented planning with large language models. In Proceedings
    of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
    Papers), pp. 20330–20354. Cited by: §6.
  • Liu et al. (2023a) B. Liu, Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, S. Zhang, J. Biswas, and P. Stone LLM+
    P: empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2304.11477. Cited by: §1, §4, §6.
  • Liu et al. (2023b) Z. Liu, H. Hu, S. Zhang, H. Guo, S. Ke, B. Liu, and Z. Wang Reason for
    future, act for now: a principled framework for autonomous LLM agents with provable sample
    efficiency. Preprint arXiv:2309.17382. Cited by: §6.
  • Lu et al. (2021) Y. Lu, Y. Shen, S. Zhou, A. Courville, J. B. Tenenbaum, and C. Gan Learning
    task decomposition with ordered memory policy network. In Int. Conf. on Learning
    Representations (ICLR), Virtual only. Cited by: §6.
  • OpenAI (2025) OpenAI OpenAI o3 and o4-mini system card. System Card OpenAI. External Links: 
    Link Cited by: §4.
  • Oy (2019) H. Oy Baba is you. Note: Game released on PC, Nintendo Switch, and other
    platformsAvailable at https://hempuli.com/baba Cited by: §2.1.
  • Paglieri et al. (2024) D. Paglieri, B. Cupiał, S. Coward, U. Piterbarg, M. Wolczyk, A. Khan, E.
    Pignatelli, Ł. Kuciński, L. Pinto, R. Fergus, et al. Balrog: benchmarking agentic llm and vlm
    reasoning on games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.13543. Cited by: §6.
  • Pascanu et al. (2017) R. Pascanu, Y. Li, O. Vinyals, N. Heess, L. Buesing, S. Racanière, D.
    Reichert, T. Weber, D. Wierstra, and P. Battaglia Learning model-based planning from scratch. 
    Preprint arXiv:1707.06170. Cited by: §2.1.
  • Piriyakulkij et al. (2025) W. T. Piriyakulkij, Y. Liang, H. Tang, A. Weller, M. Kryven, and K.
    Ellis PoE-world: compositional world modeling with products of programmatic experts. Preprint
    arXiv:2505.10819. Cited by: §6.
  • Ruoss et al. (2025) A. Ruoss, F. Pardo, H. Chan, B. Li, V. Mnih, and T. Genewein LMAct: a
    benchmark for in-context imitation learning with long multimodal demonstrations. In Proc. Int.
    Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML), Cited by: §6.
  • Samvelyan et al. (2021) M. Samvelyan, R. Kirk, V. Kurin, J. Parker-Holder, M. Jiang, E. Hambro,
    F. Petroni, H. Kuttler, E. Grefenstette, and T. Rocktäschel MiniHack the planet: a sandbox for
    open-ended reinforcement learning research. In Conference on Neural Information Processing
    Systems (NeurIPS), Datasets and Benchmarks Track, Cited by: §1.
  • Schaul (2013) T. Schaul A video game description language for model-based or interactive
    learning. In 2013 IEEE Conference on Computational Inteligence in Games (CIG), pp. 1–8. Cited
    by: §1, §2.1.
  • Schmidhuber and Wahnsiedler (1993) J. Schmidhuber and R. Wahnsiedler Planning simple
    trajectories using neural subgoal generators. In Proc. Int. Conf. on From Animals to Animats 2:
    Simulation of Adaptive Behavior, pp. 196–202. Cited by: §6.
  • Schmidhuber (1990) J. Schmidhuber Making the world differentiable: on using fully recurrent
    self-supervised neural networks for dynamic reinforcement learning and planning in
    non-stationary environments. Technical report Technical Report FKI-126-90, Tech. Univ. Munich. 
    Cited by: §2.1.
  • Schmidhuber (2015) J. Schmidhuber On learning to think: algorithmic information theory for
    novel combinations of reinforcement learning controllers and recurrent neural world models. 
    Preprint arXiv:1511.09249. Cited by: §2.1.
  • Schrittwieser et al. (2020) J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, T. Hubert, K. Simonyan, L. Sifre,
    S. Schmitt, A. Guez, E. Lockhart, D. Hassabis, T. Graepel, et al. Mastering atari, go, chess
    and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature 588 (7839), pp. 604–609. Cited by: §6.
  • Shiarlis et al. (2018) K. Shiarlis, M. Wulfmeier, S. Salter, S. Whiteson, and I. Posner TACO:
    learning task decomposition via temporal alignment for control. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine
    Learning (ICML), Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 4654–4663. Cited by: §6.
  • Smirnov et al. (2024) P. Smirnov, F. Joublin, A. Ceravola, and M. Gienger Generating consistent
    PDDL domains with large language models. Preprint arXiv:2404.07751. Cited by: §1.
  • Sutton et al. (1999) R. S. Sutton, D. Precup, and S. Singh Between mdps and semi-mdps: a
    framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence 112 (1-2
    ), pp. 181–211. Cited by: §6.
  • Sutton (1990) R. S. Sutton Integrated modeling and control based on reinforcement learning. In 
    Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), Denver, CO, USA, pp. 471–478. 
    Cited by: §2.1.
  • Tang et al. (2025) H. Tang, D. Y. Key, and K. Ellis WorldCoder, a model-based LLM agent:
    building world models by writing code and interacting with the environment. In Proc. Advances
    in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Cited by: §1, §1, §4, §6, §6.
  • Tomov et al. (2020) M. S. Tomov, S. Yagati, A. Kumar, W. Yang, and S. J. Gershman Discovery of
    hierarchical representations for efficient planning. PLoS Computational Biology 16 (4), 
    pp. e1007594. Cited by: §1, §1.
  • Tsividis et al. (2021) P. A. Tsividis, J. Loula, J. Burga, N. Foss, A. Campero, T. Pouncy, S.
    J. Gershman, and J. B. Tenenbaum Human-level reinforcement learning through theory-based
    modeling, exploration, and planning. Preprint arXiv:2107.12544. Cited by: §1, §2.1, §6, §6.
  • Vezhnevets et al. (2017) A. S. Vezhnevets, S. Osindero, T. Schaul, N. Heess, M. Jaderberg, D.
    Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu FeUdal networks for hierarchical reinforcement learning. In Proc.
    Int. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML), Sydney, Australia, pp. 3540–3549. Cited by: §6.
  • Wang et al. (2023) G. Wang, Y. Xie, Y. Jiang, A. Mandlekar, C. Xiao, Y. Zhu, L. Fan, and A.
    Anandkumar Voyager: an open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2305.16291. Cited by: §6.
  • Waytowich et al. (2024) N. R. Waytowich, D. White, M. Sunbeam, and V. G. Goecks Atari-GPT:
    investigating the capabilities of multimodal large language models as low-level policies for
    Atari games. Preprint arXiv:2408.15950. Cited by: §6.
  • Weber et al. (2017) T. Weber, S. Racanière, D. P. Reichert, L. Buesing, A. Guez, D. J. Rezende,
    A. P. Badia, O. Vinyals, N. Heess, Y. Li, R. Pascanu, P. W. Battaglia, D. Silver, and D.
    Wierstra Imagination-augmented agents for deep reinforcement learning. In Proc. Advances in
    Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), Long Beach, CA, USA, pp. 5690–5701. Cited by:
    §2.1.
  • Wei et al. (2022) J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le, D. Zhou, 
    et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Proc. Advances in
    Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 35, pp. 24824–24837. Cited by: §1, §4, §6.
  • Wong et al. (2024) L. Wong, J. Mao, P. Sharma, Z. S. Siegel, J. Feng, N. Korneev, J. B.
    Tenenbaum, and J. Andreas Learning adaptive planning representations with natural language
    guidance. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), Cited by: §6.
  • Yao et al. (2023a) S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. Griffiths, Y. Cao, and K. Narasimhan 
    Tree of thoughts: deliberate problem solving with large language models. Proc. Advances in
    Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 36, pp. 11809–11822. Cited by: §1, §6.
  • Yao et al. (2023b) S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao ReAct:
    synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In Int. Conf. on Learning Representations
    (ICLR), Kigali, Rwanda. Cited by: §1, §6, §6.
  • Ye et al. (2021) W. Ye, S. Liu, T. Kurutach, P. Abbeel, and Y. Gao Mastering atari games with
    limited data. In Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Virtual
    only, pp. 25476–25488. Cited by: §6.
  • Zhao et al. (2024) Z. Zhao, W. S. Lee, and D. Hsu Large language models as commonsense
    knowledge for large-scale task planning. Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing
    Systems (NeurIPS) 36. Cited by: §6.

Appendix A Language Model Prompts

Here we provide all the prompts used in our experiments, as follows:

  • •
   
    Box A: Prompt used to Generate PDDL Files

  • •
   
    Box A: An example of an in-context example for PDDL generation

  • •
   
    Box A: Another example of an in-context example for PDDL generation

  • •
   
    Box A: One more example of an in-context example for PDDL generation

  • •
   
    Box A: Prompt to generate Python predicates

  • •
   
    Box A: Prompt for abstraction transfer (to generate only the problem file)

  • •
   
    Box A: Prompt to generate low-level world model

  • •
   
    Domain descriptions for Labythinth and Maze (Box A), Sokoban (Box A), BabyAI (Box A) and
    Minihack (Box A and A)

Box 2: Generate PDDL Files Prompt ⬇ You are an agent playing a 2D grid game, whose raw state is 
shown below. Can you give me a minimal PDDL domain and problem file for this setup that will allow 
the agent to win the game? Think in terms of the most minimal abstract files you can. Each object 
in your PDDL problem file is named using ONLY the keys of the raw state dictionary. DO NOT PROPOSE 
PREDICATES THAT IMPLY SPATIAL RELATIONS LIKE FROM OR TO!!!!! Domain Description: {
domain_description) In your PDDL problem file do not represent configuration attributes when 
writing objects for example for unopened_black_jar you can represent it as black_jar. See example 2
and example 3!!!!!!! Feel free to propose multiple operators, and predicates at once. Also you may 
have two goals in the problem file. The raw state dictionary keys are considered traversable. 
Return your code blocks with ‘‘‘pddl ‘‘‘ markup tags so I can easily extract it. Do NOT use symbols
like "-" for the predicate names. For example, the predicate "avatar-at" should NOT be proposed 
since it has a "-". Please use all LOWERCASE for the operator names as well!!!!!!!!!! Do not name 
your PDDL DOMAIN FILE DO NOT name predicates: if, else, in, def, or any other typical python name 
predicate names should exactly be one word no underscores in it either Few shot example of what a 
nice abstraction domain and problem file should look like: {few_shot_PDDL_file_examples} Raw state 
of game (generate the files for this): {raw_state} YOUR CURRENT DOMAIN FILE YOU HAVE SYNTHESIZED: {
current_domain}
Box 3: Few Shot PDDL Example 1 ⬇ state is ’table’: [3, 4], ’mug’, [4, 4] (define (domain toy-domain
) (:requirements :strips :typing) (:types object ) (:predicates (ontop ?x - object ?y - object) ) 
(:action placeontopof :parameters (?obj1 - object ?obj2 - object) :precondition (not (ontop ?obj1 ?
obj2)) :effect (ontop ?obj1 ?obj2) ) ) (define (problem toy-problem) (:domain toy-domain) (:objects
table mug - object ) (:init ;; Initially nothing is on top of anything (not (ontop mug table)) ) (:
goal ; mug will overlap with table ’table’: [4, 4], ’mug’, [4, 4] (ontop mug table) ) )
Box 4: Few Shot PDDL Example 2 ⬇ state is ’agent’: [3, 4], ’apple’: [5, 4], ’vines’: [4,4], ’axe’
[1,4], ’unopened_black_jar: [0,1]’ (define (domain toy-domain) (:requirements :strips :typing) (:
types object ) (:predicates (eaten ?x - object ?y - object) ) (:action eat :parameters (?obj1 - 
object ?obj2 - object) :precondition (not (eaten ?obj1 ?obj2)) :effect (eaten ?obj1 ?obj2) ) ) (
define (problem toy-problem) (:domain toy-domain) (:objects agent apple black_jar - object ) (:init
(not (eaten agent apple)) ) (:goal (eaten agent apple) ) )
Box 5: Few Shot PDDL Example 3 ⬇ BEGIN EXAMPLE 3 state is ’agent’: [6, 3], ’blocked_gold_window’: 
[4,4], ’unblocked_silver_window’: [1,4] (define (domain toy-domain) (:requirements :strips :typing)
(:types object ) (:predicates (unblocked ?x - object) ) (:action clear :parameters (?x - object) :
precondition (not (unblocked ?x)) :effect (unblocked ?x) ) ) (define (problem toy-problem) (:domain
toy-domain) (:objects agent apple gold_window - object ) (:init ; the end goal is to eat the apple 
(not (unblocked gold_window)) ) (:goal (unblocked gold_window) ) )
Box 6: Python Predicate Generate Prompt ⬇ You are a software engineer that must write python 
predicates. These python predicates have to be python versions of the PDDL operators that are 
functions which take the states and arguments and returns either True or False. You will need to 
write Python predicates for all the predicates you see in the domain file. The problem file, and 
Raw State is also given to help guide you. Return your code blocks with ‘‘‘python ‘‘‘ markup tags 
so I can easily extract it. BEGIN EXAMPLE predicate: isLeftOfop(arg1, arg2) def isLeftOf(state, 
arg1, arg2): """ Returns True if arg1 is to the left of arg2, based on their x-coordinates. 
Parameters: - state: dict with keys as object names and values as [x, y] positions - arg1: object 
name (e.g., ’book’) - arg2: object name (e.g., ’lamp’) Returns: - bool: True if arg1’s x-coordinate
is less than arg2’s, False otherwise """ pos1 = state.get(arg1) pos2 = state.get(arg2) if pos1 is 
None or pos2 is None: return False return pos1[0] < pos2[0] END EXAMPLE Make sure that you always 
have state as one of the arguments! Only synthesize the predicate you see in the domain file and 
make sure to give it the same name! Domain File: {domain_file} Problem File: {problem_file} Raw 
State: {raw_state} Current Python Low Level World Model: {world_model} Game Description: {
game_description}
Box 7: Transfer Abstraction (Generate Only Problem File) ⬇ You are an agent playing a 2D grid game,
whose raw state is shown below. Can you give me a PDDL problem file for this given PDDL domain file
that will allow the agent to win the game? Each object in your PDDL problem file is named using 
ONLY the keys of the raw state dictionary. You are allowed to specify multiple goals in your 
problem file! Please think about the preconditions and effects carefully. MAKE SURE TO DOUBLE CHECK
AT THE END THAT YOU SPECIFIED MULTIPLE :GOALS IN THE PROBLEM FILE JUST BECAUSE YOU HAVE ONE MISSION
DOESN’T MEAN YOU WILL USE THAT MISSION AS THE SINGLE GOAL for example you would maybe need to do a 
subgoal in order to achieve the mission!! DO NOT JUST ASSUME ONE GOAL in problem file Return your 
code blocks with ‘‘‘pddl ‘‘‘ markup tags so I can easily extract it. {few_shot_PDDL_file_examples} 
Domain file you need to use (generate the problem file for this): {domain_file} Raw state of game (
generate the problem file for this): {raw_state} MISSION: {mission} Domain Description: {
domain_description}
Box 8: Generate Low level World Model ⬇ You are an AI agent that must come up with a transition 
model of the game you are playing. A BFS low-level planner that will use your synthesized 
transition model to find the low-level actions that will allow you to win levels of the game. You 
are also given state transition after executing random actions that will help as well. Note that if
there is no change returned after doing that action, it means that moving was prevented somehow 
such as by an obstacle. DESCRIPTION OF DOMAIN: {domain_description} CURRENT STATE: {current_state} 
ACTION SPACE: {actions_set} Replay Buffer (last {num_random_actions} transitions): {
errors_from_world_model} UTILS: {utils} RESPONSE FORMAT: - Make sure you use .get() to access the 
dictionary to avoid key errors! For example: avatar_pos = new_state.get(’avatar’) to get avatar pos
cake_pos = new_state.get(’cake’) to get cake pos ‘‘‘python # make sure to include these import 
statements from utils import directions def transition_model(state, action): Return State ‘‘‘
Box 9: Sokoban Domain Description ⬇ In this domain, you have to push the boxes into the holes to 
win. If you push the box into the hole, the box will disappear.
Box 10: BabyAI Domain Description ⬇ The agent needs to navigate the maze to win. If the agent is 
facing a key, it can pick it up. The agent can also unlock doors in which case the door will become
open_COLORNAME_door in the state. For this environment the state key ‘agent_carrying‘ is a list of 
object names the agent currently holds (e.g., ‘[’red_key’]‘). When a door is unlocked it will turn 
from locked_ to open_ (e.g., ’locked_blue_door’ -> ’open_blue_door’). When a closed door is opened 
it will turn from closed_ to open_ (e.g., ’closed_blue_door’ -> ’open_blue_door’). You can toggle 
any closed doors to open them and locked ones when you have their COLOR_key You cannot move forward
through closed_ doors unless they are _open So you will need to toggle them so closed_ doors are 
essentially similar to grey walls in that they block you In the game you cannot overlap with any 
objects, to pickup the key you need to be adjacent to it and facing it.
Box 11: Maze and Labyrinth Domain Description ⬇ In this domain, you control the avatar and need to 
reach the goal. If you touch a trap you will die.
Box 12: Minihack Navigation Levels Description ⬇ In this domain, move the agent to the downstair 
case.
Box 13: Minihack Wand Of Death Description ⬇ Kill the minotaur to win. To use the wand you zap, 
then select_f and finally shoot in the direction you want. You need to be about 5 squares away from
the minotaur to kill it with the zap. It’s good to sequence your actions by zapping, selecting f 
and then pointing to the correct direction. In order to shoot_ in a particular direction, you must 
always first zap, then select_f and then shoot in that direction - all as one action sequence.

Appendix B Results and Outputs

Here we provide some of the results and outputs for TheoryCoder-2’s learned abstractions and
low-level world model. Additionally, we provide the hand-designed oracle abstractions. Notably, the
the learned and hand-designed abstractions are similar in their preconditions and effects.

  • •
   
    Box B: human hand-designed abstractions for BabyAI

  • •
   
    Box B: TheoryCoder-2’s learned abstractions for BabyAI

  • •
   
    Box B: TheoryCoder-2’s learned Low_level world model for BabyAI

Box 14: Human Hand-Designed Abstractions for BabyAI ⬇ (:action pickup :parameters (?key - object) :
precondition (not (holding ?key)) :effect (holding ?key) ) (:action unlock :parameters (?door - 
object ?key - object) :precondition (and (holding ?key) (not (unlocked ?door)) (unlocks ?key ?door
)) :effect (unlocked ?door) )
Box 15: TheoryCoder-2’s Learned Abstractions for BabyAI ⬇ (:action pickup :parameters (?agent - 
object ?item - object) :precondition (not (holding ?agent ?item)) :effect (holding ?agent ?item) ) 
(:action unlock :parameters (?agent - object ?door - object ?key - object) :precondition (and (
holding ?agent ?key) (not (unlocked ?door))) :effect (unlocked ?door) )
Box 16: TheoryCoder-2’s Learned Low-level world model for BabyAI ⬇ from utils import directions def
transition_model(state, action): # Copy the current state to avoid modifying the original state 
new_state = state.copy() # Get agent position, direction, and carrying status agent_pos = new_state
.get(’red_agent’)[0] agent_direction = new_state.get(’agent_direction’) agent_carrying = new_state.
get(’agent_carrying’, []) # Define movement based on current direction def move_forward(pos, 
direction): return [pos[0] + direction[0], pos[1] + direction[1]] # Action: ’left’ if action == ’
left’: # Rotate direction counter-clockwise if agent_direction == [0, 1]: # Facing up new_state[’
agent_direction’] = [-1, 0] # Facing left elif agent_direction == [-1, 0]: # Facing left new_state
[’agent_direction’] = [0, -1] # Facing down elif agent_direction == [0, -1]: # Facing down 
new_state[’agent_direction’] = [1, 0] # Facing right elif agent_direction == [1, 0]: # Facing right
new_state[’agent_direction’] = [0, 1] # Facing up # Action: ’right’ elif action == ’right’: # 
Rotate direction clockwise if agent_direction == [0, 1]: # Facing up new_state[’agent_direction’] =
[1, 0] # Facing right elif agent_direction == [1, 0]: # Facing right new_state[’agent_direction’] =
[0, -1] # Facing down elif agent_direction == [0, -1]: # Facing down new_state[’agent_direction’] =
[-1, 0] # Facing left elif agent_direction == [-1, 0]: # Facing left new_state[’agent_direction’] =
[0, 1] # Facing up # Action: ’forward’ elif action == ’forward’: new_pos = move_forward(agent_pos, 
agent_direction) if new_pos not in new_state.get(’grey_wall’, []): for door_type in [’locked_’, ’
closed_’]: for key in new_state.keys(): if key.startswith(door_type) and new_pos in new_state[key]:
return new_state # Movement blocked by a closed or locked door new_state[’red_agent’] = [new_pos] #
Action: ’pickup’ elif action == ’pickup’: target_pos = move_forward(agent_pos, agent_direction) for
key, positions in new_state.items(): if ’key’ in key and target_pos in positions: new_state[’
agent_carrying’].append(key) positions.remove(target_pos) break # Action: ’toggle’ elif action == ’
toggle’: target_pos = move_forward(agent_pos, agent_direction) for door_type in [’closed_’, ’
locked_’]: for key, positions in new_state.items(): if key.startswith(door_type) and target_pos in 
positions: color = key.split(’_’)[1] if door_type == ’closed_’ or f’{color}_key’ in agent_carrying:
new_state[f’open_{color}_door’] = positions del new_state[key] break # Action: ’drop’ elif action =
= ’drop’: if agent_carrying: dropped_key = agent_carrying.pop() new_state[’agent_carrying’] = 
agent_carrying new_state[dropped_key] = [move_forward(agent_pos, agent_direction)] return new_state
Experimental support, please view the build logs for errors. Generated by L A T E xml [LOGO] .

Instructions for reporting errors

We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility
and mobile support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and
rendering, choose any of the methods listed below:

  • Click the "Report Issue" ( ) button, located in the page header.

Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.

Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and
reporting rendering errors we may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML
versions for all readers, because disability should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank
you for your continued support in championing open access for all.

Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML
maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.

We gratefully acknowledge support from our major funders, member institutions, , and all
contributors.
About · Help · Contact · Subscribe · Copyright · Privacy · Accessibility · Operational Status
(opens in new tab)
Major funding support from
Simons Foundation Simons Foundation International Schmidt Sciences
 
