source: https://arxiv.org/html/2604.12493
arxiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.12493
note: HTML dump via w3m; not a PDF.
========================================================================

Report GitHub Issue

×
Title: [                    ]

Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:

Description: [                    ]
Submit without GitHub Submit in GitHub
[smileybone] arXiv is now an independent nonprofit! Learn more ×
arXiv logo Back to arXiv
Why HTML? Report Issue Back to Abstract Download PDF   

 1. Abstract
 2. 1 Introduction
 3. 2 What is latent planning in LLMs?
 4. 3 Transcoders and Transcoder Feature Circuits
     1. Transcoders
     2. Transcoder Feature Circuits
 5. 4 Qwen-3 models engage in simple planning
     1. 4.1 Models and Data
     2. 4.2 Larger Models Succeed on Planning Tasks
     3. 4.3 Models possess planning features
     4. 4.4 Planning features are causally relevant
         1. Discussion
 6. 5 Qwen-3 use little planning when completing couplets
     1. 5.1 Qwen-3 models often successfully rhyme couplets
     2. 5.2 Larger LLMs’ poetry abilities are supported by a rhyming circuit
     3. 5.3 Qwen-3 models plan forward, but not backward, to complete couplets
     4. 5.4 Larger Models May Use Local Planning Features
 7. 6 Related Work
     1. (Feature) Circuits
     2. Planning Tasks
     3. Planning Mechanisms
 8. 7 Discussion
     1. How General Are the Discovered Planning Mechanisms?
     2. Extensions to Complex Tasks
     3. Cross-model Generalization
 9. 8 Conclusion
10. References
11. A Details of Transcoders and Feature Circuits
     1. A.1 Transcoders
         1. Transcoders
         2. Qwen-3 Transcoders
     2. A.2 Transcoder Feature Circuits
         1. Local Replacement Model
         2. Attribution
         3. Methods
12. B Simple Planning Dataset Details
13. C Is-Are Results
14. D El-La Results
15. E Model Performance on Non-Planning Aspects of Simple Planning Tasks
16. F Random Interventions
17. G Animal Probing and Intervention Experiments
18. H Couplet circuit details
     1. H.1 Couplet Dataset and Samples
     2. H.2 Circuit Verification
         1. End-of-line (EOL) features
         2. Near-end-of-line (NEOL) features
         3. Rhyming features
     3. H.3 Intervening on Rhyming Features Changes Intermediate Tokens
19. I Potential Local Planning Features
20. J Comparison of Instruction-Tuned and Base Qwen-3 Models on A-An and Is-Are Tasks
21. K Planning for Measure Words in Chinese
22. L Steering on A-An Planning Features
23. M What are nascent circuits?

License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2604.12493v1 [cs.CL] 14 Apr 2026

Latent Planning Emerges with Scale

Michael Hanna ^†^†thanks: Completed as part of the Anthropic Fellows Program. Affiliation: ILLC,
University of Amsterdam Email: m.w.hanna@uva.nl    Emmanuel Ameisen Affiliation: Anthropic Email: 
emmmanuel@anthropic.com

Abstract

LLMs can perform seemingly planning-intensive tasks, like writing coherent stories or functioning
code, without explicitly verbalizing a plan; however, the extent to which they implicitly plan is
unknown. In this paper, we define latent planning as occurring when LLMs possess internal planning
representations that (1) cause the generation of a specific future token or concept, and (2) shape
preceding context to license said future token or concept. We study the Qwen-3 family (0.6B-14B) on
simple planning tasks, finding that latent planning ability increases with scale. Models that plan
possess features that represent a planned-for word like accountant, and cause them to output an
rather than a; moreover, even the less-successful Qwen-3 4B-8B have nascent planning mechanisms. On
the more complex task of completing rhyming couplets, we find that models often identify a rhyme
ahead of time, but even large models seldom plan far ahead. However, we can elicit some planning
that increases with scale when steering models towards planned words in prose. In sum, we offer a
framework for measuring planning and mechanistic evidence of how models’ planning abilities grow
with scale.



1 Introduction

LLMs succeed at some tasks that seem to require planning—reasoning about the steps needed to
achieve a goal state—without explicitly verbalizing a plan. Understanding the extent of models’
unverbalized planning is important: such latent planning could present AI safety risks, allowing
models to engage in scheming without alerting external monitors (Balesni et al., 2024, Korbak et
al., 2025). Despite this, empirical evidence regarding LLMs’ latent planning remains limited.^1^1 1
Explicit, verbalized planning, as in LLMs’ chains of thought, is better studied (Kambhampati et
al., 2024).Past work on latent planning is largely observational: studies show that future tokens
or text attributes can be extracted from model activations (Pal et al., 2023, Pochinkov, 2025, Dong
et al., 2025). Only recently has causal evidence for planning emerged, in closed models (Lindsey et
al., 2025).

We argue that claims of latent planning must be based on causal, not observational evidence, lest
we apply the “planning” label too broadly. We consider an LLM to engage in latent planning only if
it possesses an internal representation of the planned-for token or concept tt that causes it to
generate tt; we call this forward planning. However, this representation must also cause the model
to engage in backward planning, reasoning back from its goal tt to generate a context that
accommodates it.

To understand how latent planning emerges with scale, we test 5 Qwen-3 models of increasing size on
simple tasks that could involve latent planning, like completing “Someone who handles financial
records is →\to a/an (accountant)”; we find that only models with 14B+ parameters consistently
succeed. We then use feature circuits (Marks et al., 2025, Ameisen et al., 2025) to find the
mechanisms that underlie models’ abilities. We find that there exist planning features that
represent future outputs like accountant and upweight relevant outputs like “an” (Figure 1).
Moreover, although smaller models fail, they possess planning-relevant features that promote the
correct answer.

We next have models complete rhyming couplets, where Lindsey et al. observed longer-range planning
in Claude Haiku. We find that models employ a circuit that tracks information related to poetry,
such as when a line is about to end, or what to rhyme with; however, even large models do not
engage in backward planning. We then test intermediate planning abilities by steering models
towards planned words in prose, and observe forward and backward planning, increasing with scale.
Our results provide the insight into how latent planning emerges at scale, showing that Qwen-3
models use various planning mechanisms that scale with model size. We also show that while both
forward and backward planning improve with scale, the former develops faster. We thus conduct the
largest-scale feature circuit study on open models to date. We provide code here: https://
github.com/hannamw/model-planning-public.

2 What is latent planning in LLMs?

Refer to caption
Figure 1: Feature circuit for the input Someone who studies living organisms is a biologist.
Someone who handles financial records is, explaining Qwen-3 (14B)’s output, an. The model plans to
say accountant, causing it to output the appropriate article, an. Labeled nodes are sets of active
transcoder features with shared semantics; edges indicate that the source node increases the target
node’s activation. We demonstrate node semantics by selecting a node’s feature and showing its
top-activating inputs and the vocabulary items that it up-/down-weights.

Planning is behavior in which one reasons about which actions must be taken (and in which order) to
achieve a goal. However, most past work on latent planning in LLMs searches model internals for
evidence of a goal, not goal-oriented reasoning. For example, Dong et al. (2025) prompt LLMs to
write stories, and probe the LLMs’ representations of the input prompt for information about their
future outputs. They equate successful probing with latent planning, but see App. G for evidence to
the contrary. Pochinkov (2025) takes the residual stream of LLMs that are about to start a new
paragraph, and attempts to decode the topic thereof using Patchscopes (Ghandeharioun et al., 2024);
again, successful decoding is taken to entail planning. Pal et al. (2023) also decode models’
future tokens with probes and Patchscopes—though they do not call this planning. Lindsey et al.
(2025) are unique in providing causal evidence: studying LLMs’ ability to complete rhyming
couplets, they not only observe representations of the rhyming word that the model plans to output,
but also causally intervene on them, changing the upcoming word and its preceding context that
accommodates it.

We argue that, if LLM planning entails reasoning about the steps needed to output a specific future
token, decoding the future token is insufficient to evidentiate planning. Consider a model that
always outputs the same token, or one that outputs 0, 2, 4, 6,…; in both cases, a probe could
likely predict many future tokens, but neither task requires planning. More generally, the
decodability of a given attribute from model representations does not entail its use in model
processing: probes are known to decode unused information (Ravichander et al., 2021). Instead, if
latent planning is a mechanism that models deploy, a definition thereof should make causally
verifiable mechanistic claims.

Inspired by Lindsey et al., we define an LLM given a length-nn input as engaging in latent planning
if it possess a representation of a planned token or concept that:

Condition 1 (Forward Planning): causes it to output the specific token or concept tt at some
position n+kn+k, k>1k>1. This strengthens the decodability criterion from past work: we require
that some representation causes the LLM to produce tt, not just that tt be predictable from the
LLM’s internals.

Condition 2 (Backward Planning): causes it to output a context that licenses said token or concept
tt. This requires that models work backwards from the goal to formulate a context that licenses it.
Consider the input s=s= The capital of Texas →\to is →\to Austin. LLMs may have an Austin
representation at the Texas position of ss; ablating it stops the model from later outputting 
Austin. However, this is only backward planning if the Austin representation causes the model to
produce is. This is unlikely, given that one can predict is without knowing that Austin is the
capital of Texas. Note that some past work focuses on representations that do not aid immediately
next-token prediction (Wu et al., 2024).

3 Transcoders and Transcoder Feature Circuits

To identify causally relevant planning representations, we first decompose model activations into
sparse features using transcoders (Dunefsky et al., 2024). Then, we find the causally relevant
subgraph thereof, known as a feature circuit (Marks et al., 2025, Ameisen et al., 2025).

Transcoders

Transcoders are auxiliary models that replace the model’s MLPs (Dunefsky et al., 2024); each
transcoder takes in one MLP’s inputs and predicts its outputs. Formally, a transcoder takes in a
given MLP’s input activations 𝐡∈ℝd\mathbf{h}\in\mathbb{R}^{d} and computes a sparse representation
𝐳∈ℝn\mathbf{z}\in\mathbb{R}^{n} as 𝐳=f⁡(𝐖e​n​c​𝐡+𝐛e​n​c)\mathbf{z}=f\left(\mathbf{W}_{enc}\mathbf
{h}+\mathbf{b}_{enc}\right). It then reconstructs the MLP’s output activations 𝐡′∈ℝd\mathbf{h}^{\
prime}\in\mathbb{R}^{d} as 𝐡′~=𝐖d​e​c​𝐳+𝐛d​e​c\tilde{\mathbf{h}^{\prime}}=\mathbf{W}_{dec}\mathbf
{z}+\mathbf{b}_{dec}. ff is an activation function, while 𝐖e​n​c,𝐛e​n​c,𝐖d​e​c,\mathbf{W}_{enc},\
mathbf{b}_{enc},\mathbf{W}_{dec}, and 𝐛d​e​c\mathbf{b}_{dec} are learned parameters.

Transcoders are useful because they are trained to compute representations 𝐳\mathbf{z} that are 
sparse and monosemantic: most dimensions (or features) are zero on any given input; each feature
should fire on only one concept. By contrast, MLPs’ hidden activations are often dense and
polysemantic, firing on multiple concepts (Olah et al., 2017, Elhage et al., 2022). If one wishes
to determine which concepts a model represents in its activations, it is thus easier to interpret
transcoder features.

We interpret the ithi^{\text{th}} feature of a given transcoder by displaying the inputs that
maximize its activation 𝐳i\mathbf{z}_{i}. We also display the tokens whose unembedding vectors have
the highest and lowest dot product with the feature’s column in 𝐖d​e​c\mathbf{W}_{dec}; these are
the vocabulary items that it directly up- and downweights. See Figure 1 for example feature
visualizations, used to manually label features.

We often intervene with respect to transcoder features, to verify our interpretation of a given
feature. For example, we might take a feature vector 𝐳\mathbf{z}, set its activation to 0, and
observe the change in model behavior. For more background and technical details on transcoders, see
Section A.1.

Transcoder Feature Circuits

Given a model, transcoders trained on each MLP thereof, and an input, we construct a transcoder
feature circuit (Ameisen et al., 2025): a weighted acyclic digraph describing the causal
relationships between the model’s inputs, transcoder features, and logits. Each edge weight
indicates the source node’s direct effect on the target, i.e. the amount by which it directly
increases the latter’s value. Once features are annotated, and similar features grouped together,
the circuit serves as a mechanistic explanation for a model’s behavior on the input, as seen in
Figure 1.

We compute feature circuits using Ameisen et al.’s algorithm, detailed in Section A.2. Unlike other
feature circuit techniques, it computes exact direct effect values—conditional on the model’s
attention patterns and layer normalization denominators. We thus know the precise causal
relationship between features, ignoring contributions to these quantities, which is often useful in
practice. We use the circuit-tracer library for circuit-finding and interventions (Hanna et al.,
2025).

The transcoder feature circuit paradigm helps ensure that any planning features found fulfill our
conditions, as features are guaranteed to be causally relevant, under the assumptions made by
transcoder feature circuits, and we can see what intermediate features represent.

4 Qwen-3 models engage in simple planning

4.1 Models and Data

Category              Example Input               Next  Planned
a / an   Someone who handles financial records is an   accountant
is / are There were 5 dogs but 4 left. Now there  is   1
el / la  El animal marino con ocho tentáculos es  el   pulpo


Table 1: Three simple planning tasks. Each task prompts the model to output a planned token,
preceded by a next token with two possible forms; the planned token determines the correct form.

We study planning in 5 models from the Qwen-3 family (0.6B, 1.7B, 4B, 8B, 14B; Yang et al., 2025).
We study models of varying size from one family to draw conclusions about how planning behavior
develops as models scale. Note that although these models are instruction-tuned, they produce
reasonable output on both instruction-formatted and language-modeling-formatted inputs, so we use
both formats. For feature circuit analyses, we use Hanna et al.’s (2025) transcoders, which cover
Qwen-3 (0.6B-14B); we include Qwen-3 (32B) in our transcoder-free behavioral analyses.

We craft three simple tasks to serve as a testbed for LLMs’ planning abilities. We choose tasks to
which LLMs were likely exposed during pre-training, as model abilities are often stronger on such
tasks (McCoy et al., 2024). Each task (Table 1) consists of inputs that push the model to produce a
specific content word, preceded by a function word that must agree with it. For example, in the is
/ are task example in Table 1, the model must output 1, preceded by the correct form of to be. See
App. B for details on the construction and composition of these datasets. We discuss a/an in the
main text; our successful is/are experiments and less successful el/la experiments are in App. C /
D. For experiments in another language, see experiments with Chinese measure words in Appendix K,
while experiments on base models are in Appendix J.

4.2 Larger Models Succeed on Planning Tasks

We first evaluate models’ abilities on the a/an task, recording their next token prediction on each
input. We report per-class recall, as performance differs by class. We find (Figure 2, left) that
all models have high recall (>0.8>0.8) of a, which is the majority class both in our dataset and
English in general. Recall of the minority class an is high (>0.8>0.8) for Qwen-3 14B; small models
(0.6-1.7B) always predict the majority class, and mid-sized models’ performance smoothly increases.


Figure 2: Left: Qwen-3 family models’ recall of correct article on the a/an task. All models can
recall a, but models ≤8\leq 8B have lower recall on the less-common an. Right: The mean proportion
of influence flowing through planning nodes in the a/an dataset, by model, article, and
correctness. On an examples where the model correctly predicts the next token, more influence tends
to flow through the planning nodes. This effect is reversed and weaker for the majority class a.

Note that this is not attributable to models’ inability to determine the planned token: in Appendix
 E, we show that models with under 14B parameters can calculate the answer to is/are questions, but
fail to predict the correct verb, producing outputs like …there are 1 dog. It thus appears that
simple planning (and not just e.g. math) emerges at 4B to 8B parameters.

4.3 Models possess planning features

To determine if models truly plan on these tasks, we compute each model’s feature circuit for each
example in our datasets, as described in Section 3. We then visualize and qualitatively analyze a
subset of the feature circuits, grouping qualitatively similar features together and labeling them.

We find that these circuits contain features that represent the planned token. Figure 1 shows a
typical example from Qwen-3 (14B): it possesses planning features (for accountant) that feed into
features that upweight the same token. These activate features that directly upweight the correct
next token (a/an). This suggests that models plan to output the target token, which then leads them
to output the correct next token. As in Lindsey et al. (2025), the planning features (e.g., the 
accounting feature in Figure 1) appear to simply represent the planned word, and not specifically
in planning contexts.

Planning features differ slightly by task. In the is/are dataset, such features are more common
when the answer is small (from 1 to 3). The el/la dataset’s features fire on the target word in
English, despite its lack of grammatical gender, relevant to this task. Surprisingly, on a/an and 
is/are, even poorly-performing models have planning features, suggesting nascent latent planning
mechanisms.

4.4 Planning features are causally relevant

We now verify that these planning features truly drive the model’s prediction of the correct next
token. We start by programmatically finding each example’s planning features; a feature is
considered planning-relevant if is active at the last position of the input (is), and it either
upweights the planned word (or a prefix thereof), or contains it in 5 out of 10 of its
top-activating texts. We find that this yields similar planning features to those found via manual
search.

With these features, we perform two causal relevance analyses. First, we ask—how important are
planning nodes according to our circuits? Each edge in the circuit reflects the direct influence of
a source node on a target node, but we can also consider the total flow from a source to a target
node, which might travel via multi-node paths. To quantify the importance of the planning nodes, we
measure the proportion of the total flow between the circuit’s inputs and logits that is mediated
by the planning features, comparing the flow in cases where the model is in/correct.

We find (Figure 2, right) that when models predict the minority class an correctly, more of the
total influence flows through the planning nodes. This effect is reversed (and weaker) for the
majority-class a case, despite roughly equal planning node counts across classes, suggesting that
planning nodes are not generally helpful for these examples. In neither case is the proportion
large, but this is unsurprising: much of the flow is likely mediated by nodes that identify the
need for an article such as a or an, upweighting them both, rather than discriminating between
them.

Second, we causally intervene on planning features. For each model, we a) take the examples on
which it succeeds and ablate the planning features (e.g. accountant and say “acc” in Figure 1),
setting them to zero, and b) take the examples on which it fails and highly upweight their planning
features, setting their activations to 5×\times their usual activations. If these features indeed
cause models to output the planned token, these interventions should harm and improve performance
respectively.


Figure 3: Left: Change in p⁡(correct article)p(\textit{correct article}) caused by zero and
multiplying interventions on planning features. As expected, ablating these harms performance,
while upweighting them improves it; however, both affect primarily an examples, the minority class.
Right: Change in p⁡(correct article)p(\textit{correct article}) caused by direct-effect
interventions. Effects are smaller, indicating that planning features act both directly (by
upweighting the correct article) and indirectly (by activating e.g say “a/an” features.)

We find (Figure 3, left) that features are indeed causally relevant. Feature ablation (top left)
harms model performance, but only on minority-class an examples. Similarly, boosting planning
features improves performance drastically an examples, with larger models seeing slightly larger
improvements; however, the effects on a examples are almost zero. This asymmetry aligns with our
prior analysis, and suggests that planning nodes are more important for minority-class examples
where models must work against their priors. This intervention is effective on Qwen-3 4B and 8B,
indicating that although their overall performance is worse than Qwen-3 14B, they likely rely on
similar planning mechanisms, with planning features encouraging the production of an when
necessary.

We also note that our feature interventions are more successful than a random baseline: while zero
ablating randomly selected features active at the last position of the prompt occasionally harms
performance, multiplying random features fails to boost model performance (see App. F for details).

Discussion

Our results suggest that Qwen-3 engages in simple backward planning; however, it is unclear if this
is driven by direct-effects alone. The accountant feature might have a high cosine similarity with
the unembedding vector for an, upweighting its logit. This, combined with a mechanism that
upweights both a and an in relevant contexts, would suffice to upweight the correct article, as we
observe. We disprove this by performing direct-effects interventions: we upweight the planning
features, but freeze the model’s other features, blocking second-order effects.

This intervention’s effects (Figure 3, right) are much weaker than the original interventions: zero
ablations are less harmful, and multiplying interventions harm performance as often as they help.
The planning features’ importance can thus not be explained by direct effects alone, suggesting
that the say “a/an” features play an important role in mediating planning. For more evidence, see
Appendix L, where we steer on the planning features, and find that while this often causes models
to output the planned-for word, it seldom causes them to output a/an.

One could also hypothesize that although say “a/an” features are involved in a/an planning, the
model treats noun phrases (like an accountant) like a single, multi-token word; no planning is
involved. However, models also plan when outputting “there is 1 dog left”, where this multi-token
argument is much less plausible. We thus maintain that simple planning occurs in these cases.

One outstanding question is the source of the gap between Qwen-3 (14B) and its weaker 4B and 8B
counterparts; what makes their circuits nascent rather than fully-developed? In Appendix M, we
examine this question and find that when these mid-sized models fail on an examples, they have far
fewer planning features active than when they succeed. By contrast, smaller models seldom have any
planning features active, and Qwen-3 (14B) has many planning features active in both cases.

5 Qwen-3 use little planning when completing couplets

The preceding experiments show that Qwen-3 models more successfully plan as their size increases,
but leave open the question of longer-range planning mechanisms. There is precedent: Lindsey et al.
(2025) find that, given the first line of a rhyming couplet, like He saw a carrot and had to grab
it, Claude-3.5 Haiku produces the next line His hunger was like a starving rabbit using a rabbit
feature that controls the rhyming word and generates a coherent context. Motivated by this, we
study Qwen-3 models on rhyming couplets, searching for long-range planning.

5.1 Qwen-3 models often successfully rhyme couplets

We first test whether Qwen-3 models can complete rhyming couplets at all. To do so, we generate a
dataset of 985 first lines of couplets, by prompting Qwen-3 (32B) to produce rhyming couplets on 43
topics, ranging from coming of age to animals and wildlife, and taking the first line of each. LLM
generation of couplets avoids cases of couplets memorized from the training data. We then greedily
sample a second line of the couplet from each model, and evaluate its rhyme with the first couplet
by extracting the last word of each line, extracting their vowels and final consonants using
CMUDict (Carnegie Mellon University, 2014, Bird and Loper, 2004), and verifying that they match.
Our results (Figure 5, left) show that larger models rhyme with 50+% accuracy; smaller ones fail
more often. Models engage in slant or assonant (vowel-only) rhyme, rhyming words like craze with 
page; models with 8B parameters produce a valid assonant rhyme in over 70% of cases.

5.2 Larger LLMs’ poetry abilities are supported by a rhyming circuit

Refer to caption
Figure 4: A feature circuit for the couplet Fury burns where calm once stayed,\n Hope flickers
where the shadows laid, explaining Qwen-3 (14B)’s decision to output shadows laid,\n. Halfway
through outputting the couplet’s second line, the model’s ”near end of a line of poetry” features
activate. These cause it to attend back to the end of the first line, where “end of a line of
poetry” features are active, and to move “rhymes with -ayed” features into the second line. These
influence the model’s outputs, eventually leading to laid. End of line features then cause it to
output .\n.

To test whether models plan when completing couplets, we again use transcoder circuits. For each
model, we filter the examples from our dataset to those where the model completes the couplet’s
second line with a rhyming word. We then attribute from this rhyming word’s logit, given the input
leading up to the rhyming word; that is, given an input like Fury burns where calm once
stayed,…Hope flickers where the shadows laid, we find the circuit explaining the model’s prediction
of laid. We limit this to 100 examples per model. See App. H.1 for rhyming couplet data details.

We qualitatively analyze the circuits, and find that in larger models, an interpretable circuit
emerges. Given the first line of the couplet, the model begins to generate the second with little
planning. Near the end of the second line, the model recognizes that it is near the end of a line
of rhyming poetry, activating near end of line features. These cause it to attend to the end of the
first line, drawn by the end of line features active there. Rhyming features (e.g. rhymes with
“-ayed”) at the end of the first line thereby activate similar features in the second line. There,
these features remain active until they eventually cause the model to output a rhyming token. Once
the model completes the rhyme, it activates end of line features and stops generation. Figure 4
depicts this process.

We defer detailed evidence for our circuit to Section H.2. There, we show that end of line features
are causally responsible for both the model’s decision to end a line of poetry, and for indicating
where the model should attend to, in order to extract the rhyming features. We similarly show that
the near end of line features cause the model to attend back to the end of line feature position.
Here, we focus on the question: does the couplet circuit involve planning?

5.3 Qwen-3 models plan forward, but not backward, to complete couplets

If the couplet circuit involves planning, we view the rhyming features at the end of the couplet’s
first line as the most likely planning features. They clearly represent the rhyme to be output, and
our circuits indicate that they influence the model’s decision to output rhyming words. However, we
must still test that both forward and backward planning occur when models generate rhymes.

We first define rules to automatically find rhyming features. This is challenging, as Qwen-3 models
represent e.g. an -ayed feature via separate -ai- and -d sound features, which specify the vowel
and final consonant of the rhyme. The top-activating tokens for such features tend to be subwords,
and may employ multiple, potentially nonstandard spellings for a given sound; see Figure 4 for
example features. As a heuristic, we identify features whose top-10 max-activating tokens are short
(under 5 characters), and do not represent a single word (they activate on the same word at most 5
times). We also require that at least 7 of these 10 tokens start with the same vowel, or end with
the same consonant, to ensure that the feature’s top-tokens all represent one sound. This
definition captures rhyming-relevant features with relatively high precision but only moderate
recall.

Next, for each couplet, we downweight the rhyme features at the end of its first line, multiplying
their activations by -3. We then sample a random couplet with a distinct rhyming sound, and
upweight its rhyme features, multiplying their original activations by 7; we find these steering
hyperparameters via manual search. We then generate a completion to the first line of the original
couplet, while steering on the end of the first line. We measure rhyming accuracy with respect to
the new rhyme.


Figure 5: Left: Qwen-3 rhyming accuracy. In the base case, models have moderate rhyming accuracy,
reaching 0.6 at 14B parameters (solid blue); when we consider assonant (vowel-only) rhyme, Qwen-3
(14B) achieves 0.8 (dashed blue). When steered to predict a new rhyme, model accuracy is only
moderate for perfect rhymes (solid orange), but improves with scale, and is better on assonant
rhyme (dashed orange). Right: Model rhyming accuracy when trying to predict a token satisfying the
couplet’s the steered rhyme (blue lines) or original rhyme (red lines), given the original (solid)
or steered (dashed) context. The model predicts the steered-for rhyme with similar accuracy given
the original or steered context. This suggests that the steered context does not better license the
rhyme.

It is harder to quantify Condition 2—whether a given context licenses a specific word (or set
thereof) as opposed to licensing many words. However, we can test which context (the original or
steered one) best enables the model to predict the new rhyme, when the model is steered towards the
new rhyme. If the new context indeed licenses the new rhyme better, the model should more
accurately predict a rhyming word given it. To test this, we feed the model both the original and
steered couplet completions, with their last word removed. We then record the model’s generation
given each, when steered towards the new rhyme, and compute rhyming accuracy with respect to the
new rhyme.

We find that models do engage in forward planning: Figure 5 (left) shows that steering on the rhyme
features does change the model’s rhyme to the new rhyme in the case of larger models (8B-14B).
Though accuracy is only moderate (40%), normal rhyming accuracy was similarly modest at 60%, and
assonant rhyme accuracy is higher (up to 60%). Moreover, we observe that steering changes both the
final rhyming word and the intermediate context; see Section H.3 for quantitative evidence.

However, Figure 5 (right) shows that the intermediate context generated under intervention does not
necessarily license the new rhyme better. When we steer the model, it is equally likely to output
the injected rhyme given the steered intermediate context (light blue, dashed line) as when given
the original one (dark blue, solid line). Giving the model the intermediate context produced with
steering, but not steering it, elicits the original rhyme with relatively high accuracy: near 60%
across models (light red, dashed line). This is low compared to the accuracy given the original
context (near 100%; dark red, solid line), which could suggest that the original context better
licenses the original rhyme. However, the fact that we only intervened on examples where models
rhymed successfully inflates this accuracy. Overall, these results suggest a lack of strong
backward planning.

5.4 Larger Models May Use Local Planning Features


Figure 6: Adaptation metrics by model. As models grow, so does the proportion of (1) outputs
containing X (blue), and (3) coherent and X-containing outputs that also adapt the context to
license X (green). Few examples do all three.

Though the backward planning results are mostly negative, results for larger models (8B-14B) trend
in the right direction: they more accurately predict the steered rhyme given the steered context,
and less accurately predict the original rhyme; in App. H, we see that their steered generations
overlap less with original generations. Moreover, manually inspecting Qwen-3 (14B)
couplet-completion circuits showed that while most couplet circuits involve second-line rhyming
features that upweight rhyming words, some instead involve say X features that upweight a specific
upcoming word. These often coincide with rhymes that require some setup, such as a say “night”
feature occurring before the model outputs in the night. These are prime candidates for local
planning features, that plan for short phrases, but not whole lines; we thus test whether they
elicit backward planning in models.

We first identify potential planning features, searching our couplet circuits for say X features
that upweight the output rhyming word, but are active prior to when X is output: such features
might adapt the preceding context to license that word. We then steer models using these features
on 100 inputs from the TinyStories dataset (Eldan and Li, 2023), which we use as a source of
neutral input text. For each steered output, we check if it (1) contains the steered word, (2) is
coherent, and (3) adapted the context to fit the steered word. We evaluate (1) programmatically,
use Claude 4 Sonnet to evaluate (2), and manually verify (2) and evaluate (3) on a subset of
outputs that satisfy (1) and (2). See Appendix I for experimental details.

We find (Figure 6) that steering on these say X features often induces models to output X (blue
bars). Moreover, for outputs that are coherent and contain X, models—especially larger ones—do
adapt their outputs to produce whole phrases like in the night or had a recurring dream (green
bars). The scaling trend likely occurs because larger models have more such local planning features
in their couplet circuits. However, this phenomenon is sensitive to steering strength, and these
features occur only in a small minority of couplets. We hypothesize that such features are part of
an emerging planning mechanism in larger models, much as a/an and is/are planning can be seen to
emerge in Qwen-3 (4B); at larger scale, models may more reliably engage in local planning. Still,
more study is needed to confirm the role these features play.

6 Related Work

(Feature) Circuits

We build on prior work on circuits, which attempts to capture an (ideally minimal) set of units
that are causally relevant to and explain a model’s behavior on a task (Olah et al., 2020, Elhage
et al., 2021, Conmy et al., 2023). Early LLM circuits were composed of attention heads and MLPs,
and explained how models performed indirect object identification and the greater-than operation (
Wang et al., 2023, Hanna et al., 2023). Circuits composed of features from sparse autoencoders or
transcoders have the added benefit of having interpretable nodes; however, finding them is
expensive and requires auxiliary models. They have been used to explain gender bias, syntactic
processing, and more (Marks et al., 2025, Hanna and Mueller, 2025, Lindsey et al., 2025).

Planning Tasks

LLMs’ grammatical agreement abilities, as in our a/an, is/are, and el/la tasks, have been widely
studied. LLMs generally excel at agreement, preferring sentences with correct agreement over
incorrect ones (Warstadt et al., 2020, Chang and Bergen, 2024). Prior mechanistic work on agreement
is more limited to is/are and the broader phenomenon of subject-verb agreement: past work has found
linear subspaces, neurons, and sparse features relevant to it (Lasri et al., 2022, Finlayson et
al., 2021, Brinkmann et al., 2025). Past work has studied LLM poetry and rhyming abilities in the
context of building and evaluating poem-generating systems (Sawicki et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2024
, Suvarna et al., 2024); Lindsey et al. (2025) provide the first mechanistic study.

Planning Mechanisms

Section 2 discusses past work, but contemporaneous work also addresses planning: Nainani et al.
(2025) search for code planning feature circuits in Gemma-2 (2B; Gemma Team, 2024), while Maar et
al. (2025) investigate poetry abilities across models using probes.

7 Discussion

How General Are the Discovered Planning Mechanisms?

Our evidence suggests that the planning mechanisms we discover are not general in the sense that
the model uses the exact same circuit for all planning tasks. Whether a given model plans on a
given task is regulated by the model’s capacity, as well as the task’s complexity, along with its
frequency and importance (in terms of training loss). Thus, larger models plan more, and common
planning tasks are learned faster, resulting in piecemeal planning abilities, rather than a large
set of abilities and a unified mechanism.

Successful planning circuits often follow a motif: there are planning features indicating the
planned word, which then activate downstream features responsible for backward planning. However,
models may learn to plan in one case (a/an agreement) but not others (couplets), simply because the
former is more important to reducing its loss than the latter, and the model is too small to learn
both.

Extensions to Complex Tasks

In this paper, we study relatively simple tasks, as Qwen-3 (14B) and smaller struggle with complex
planning tasks (like e.g. chain-of-thought unfaithfulness, as in Lindsey et al. (2025)); this
prevents us from studying such tasks. However, as open source models become more competent,
circuit-tracing should still be able to address these planning behaviors. Sometimes, as in
chain-of-thought unfaithfulness examples where the model plans for a single-token answer, it may
suffice to simply attribute from the given answer token, as done here.

In other cases, e.g. detecting a hidden goal that drives model behavior without producing one
“smoking gun” answer token, we may want to attribute back from more general high-level model
actions, such as “Why did the model produce a refusal?” or “Why did the model make a given
suggestion?”. Though little past work does so, attributing from such higher-level actions is
possible by attributing from arbitrary directions in activation space. In this case, one must
identify a direction in activation space corresponding to such an action, and attribute from this.
One could identify causally relevant directions for such actions via probing or difference-in-means
approaches.

Cross-model Generalization

In this paper, we study only one model family, to focus the effects of scale on planning. The lack
of transcoders for similarly competent models currently hinders comparisons across model families,
but we believe such cross-model comparisons would be valuable. That said, past work indicates that
circuits can generalize across model family and scale: the circuits for e.g. multi-hop reasoning in
Gemma-2 (2b) (Hanna et al., 2025) look similar to those in Claude (Lindsey et al., 2025), a vastly
larger and more competent model.

We also note that our planning framework can be applied without transcoders. For example, one could
train probes to extract a planned word or rhyme family and perform interventions with respect to
them; see Maar et al. (2025) for work along these lines. However, this approach is less flexible,
requiring new probes for each task, and losing the fine-grained insights of transcoder feature
circuits. Recent work suggests that circuit-tracing may even be possible with neurons alone (Arora
et al., 2025), allowing for both fine-grained insights and cross-model comparison.

8 Conclusion

Our experiments have shown that some Qwen-3 models engage in latent planning, possessing features
that represent the planned word and causally influence both the output word and the context
preceding it. Both forward and backward planning abilities improve with scale, but the former
improves before the latter; even in Qwen-3 (14B), planning multiple tokens ahead is rare.

Why might planning only begin to emerge at scale? We hypothesize that planning, especially backward
planning, is costly to implement: models must learn not only to plan for a specific token, but also
how to plan backwards for it in a context-specific way; a/an planning and couplet planning have
distinct mechanisms. Thus, models may learn to plan only after exhausting other, simpler ways of
reducing their loss. Bachmann and Nagarajan (2024) suggest that teacher forcing in LLM pre-training
may also reduce the pressure to plan: even if a model fails to backwards-plan for a crucial
agreeing token like an, teacher forcing provides that token anyway. Models that suffer the
consequences of their poor planning, such as those trained with on-policy reinforcement learning
methods, may thus face more pressure to plan.

Whatever the reasons behind this, latent planning abilities in Qwen-3 models up to 14B parameters
are still nascent. This is relevant for scheming, an AI safety risk where models work towards
secret goals (Balesni et al., 2024); past work has induced scheming in models, and caught them by
reading their chains of thought (Meinke et al., 2025). Models with strong latent planning abilities
might thus cause concern, but we observe little complex planning in Qwen-3. What we observe instead
is latent planning abilities that appear to improve with scale—and merit monitoring as models grow.

In this paper, we have provided a framework for doing precisely that; however, monitoring latent
planning with feature circuits is still a significant technical challenge. Open-source circuits
work on models above 8B parameters is still rare. Large-scale work on feature circuits is yet
scarcer, due to the lack of open transcoders for large models. As mechanistic interpretability’s
seeks interpret more sophisticated behaviors, its methods must scale to match the models that
possess them.

Reproducibility Statement

We conduct our experiments with openly available models, including both LLMs and transcoders. We
release the data and code used as part of this study in the following repository: https://
github.com/hannamw/model-planning-public. Our experiments can be run with as little as 40GB of GPU
RAM, though they will run much faster on 80GB of memory, and quite quickly (around 1 GPU-day) on
140GB of RAM (i.e. one NVIDIA H200 GPU). Note that features, models, transcoders, and circuits are
large; we recommend having 3TB of disk space available.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Denis Paperno and Jim Marr for insightful conversations, and thank the Anthropic
Fellows Program for enabling and supporting this project. MH is supported by an OpenAI
Superalignment Grant and a Google PhD Fellowship.

References

  • Ameisen et al. (2025) E. Ameisen, J. Lindsey, A. Pearce, W. Gurnee, N. L. Turner, B. Chen, C.
    Citro, D. Abrahams, S. Carter, B. Hosmer, J. Marcus, M. Sklar, A. Templeton, T. Bricken, C.
    McDougall, H. Cunningham, T. Henighan, A. Jermyn, A. Jones, A. Persic, Z. Qi, T. Ben Thompson,
    S. Zimmerman, K. Rivoire, T. Conerly, C. Olah, and J. Batson Circuit tracing: revealing
    computational graphs in language models. Transformer Circuits Thread. External Links: Link 
    Cited by: §A.1, §A.2, §A.2, §A.2, §1, §3, §3, §3.
  • Arora et al. (2025) A. Arora, Z. Wu, J. Steinhardt, and S. Schwettmann Language model circuits
    are sparse in the neuron basis. Note: https://transluce.org/neuron-circuits Cited by: §7.
  • Bachmann and Nagarajan (2024) G. Bachmann and V. Nagarajan The pitfalls of next-token
    prediction. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, R.
    Salakhutdinov, Z. Kolter, K. Heller, A. Weller, N. Oliver, J. Scarlett, and F. Berkenkamp
    (Eds.), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 235, pp. 2296–2318. External Links: Link
    Cited by: §8.
  • Balesni et al. (2024) M. Balesni, M. Hobbhahn, D. Lindner, A. Meinke, T. Korbak, J. Clymer, B.
    Shlegeris, J. Scheurer, C. Stix, R. Shah, N. Goldowsky-Dill, D. Braun, B. Chughtai, O. Evans,
    D. Kokotajlo, and L. Bushnaq Towards evaluations-based safety cases for ai scheming. External
    Links: 2411.03336, Link Cited by: §1, §8.
  • Bird and Loper (2004) S. Bird and E. Loper NLTK: the natural language toolkit. In Proceedings
    of the ACL Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 214–217. 
    External Links: Link Cited by: §5.1.
  • Bricken et al. (2023) T. Bricken, A. Templeton, J. Batson, B. Chen, A. Jermyn, T. Conerly, N.
    Turner, C. Anil, C. Denison, A. Askell, R. Lasenby, Y. Wu, S. Kravec, N. Schiefer, T. Maxwell,
    N. Joseph, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, A. Tamkin, K. Nguyen, B. McLean, J. E. Burke, T. Hume, S. Carter,
    T. Henighan, and C. Olah Towards monosemanticity: decomposing language models with dictionary
    learning. Transformer Circuits Thread. Note: https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/
    monosemantic-features/index.html Cited by: §A.1, §A.1.
  • Brinkmann et al. (2025) J. Brinkmann, C. Wendler, C. Bartelt, and A. Mueller Large language
    models share representations of latent grammatical concepts across typologically diverse
    languages. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the
    Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers),
    L. Chiruzzo, A. Ritter, and L. Wang (Eds.), Albuquerque, New Mexico, pp. 6131–6150. External
    Links: Link, Document, ISBN 979-8-89176-189-6 Cited by: §6.
  • Carnegie Mellon University (2014) Carnegie Mellon University The carnegie mellon pronouncing
    dictionary. Note: Version 0.7b External Links: Link Cited by: §5.1.
  • Chang and Bergen (2024) T. A. Chang and B. K. Bergen Language model behavior: a comprehensive
    survey. Computational Linguistics 50 (1), pp. 293–350. External Links: ISSN 0891-2017, Document
    , Link, https://direct.mit.edu/coli/article-pdf/50/1/293/2367117/coli_a_00492.pdf Cited by: §6.
  • Chen et al. (2024) Y. Chen, H. Gröner, S. Zarrieß, and S. Eger Evaluating diversity in
    automatic poetry generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in
    Natural Language Processing, Y. Al-Onaizan, M. Bansal, and Y. Chen (Eds.), Miami, Florida, USA,
    pp. 19671–19692. External Links: Link, Document Cited by: §6.
  • Conmy et al. (2023) A. Conmy, A. N. Mavor-Parker, A. Lynch, S. Heimersheim, and A.
    Garriga-Alonso Towards automated circuit discovery for mechanistic interpretability. In 
    Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, External Links: Link Cited
    by: §6.
  • Dong et al. (2025) Z. Dong, Z. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Yang, and C. Lu Emergent response planning in
    LLMs. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, External Links: Link Cited
    by: Appendix G, Appendix G, Appendix G, §1, §2.
  • Dunefsky et al. (2024) J. Dunefsky, P. Chlenski, and N. Nanda Transcoders find interpretable
    LLM feature circuits. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
    Systems, External Links: Link Cited by: §A.1, §3, §3.
  • Eldan and Li (2023) R. Eldan and Y. Li TinyStories: how small can language models be and still
    speak coherent english?. External Links: 2305.07759, Link Cited by: Appendix I, §5.4.
  • Elhage et al. (2022) N. Elhage, T. Hume, C. Olsson, N. Schiefer, T. Henighan, S. Kravec, Z.
    Hatfield-Dodds, R. Lasenby, D. Drain, C. Chen, R. Grosse, S. McCandlish, J. Kaplan, D. Amodei,
    M. Wattenberg, and C. Olah Toy models of superposition. Transformer Circuits Thread. External
    Links: Link Cited by: §A.1, §A.1, §3.
  • Elhage et al. (2021) N. Elhage, N. Nanda, C. Olsson, T. Henighan, N. Joseph, B. Mann, A.
    Askell, Y. Bai, A. Chen, T. Conerly, N. DasSarma, D. Drain, D. Ganguli, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, D.
    Hernandez, A. Jones, J. Kernion, L. Lovitt, K. Ndousse, D. Amodei, T. Brown, J. Clark, J.
    Kaplan, S. McCandlish, and C. Olah A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. 
    Transformer Circuits Thread. Note: https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html 
    Cited by: Figure 8, §6.
  • Finlayson et al. (2021) M. Finlayson, A. Mueller, S. Gehrmann, S. Shieber, T. Linzen, and Y.
    Belinkov Causal analysis of syntactic agreement mechanisms in neural language models. In 
    Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
    11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), C.
    Zong, F. Xia, W. Li, and R. Navigli (Eds.), Online, pp. 1828–1843. External Links: Link,
    Document Cited by: §6.
  • Gemma Team (2024) Gemma Team Gemma 2: improving open language models at a practical size. 
    External Links: 2408.00118, Link Cited by: §6.
  • Ghandeharioun et al. (2024) A. Ghandeharioun, A. Caciularu, A. Pearce, L. Dixon, and M. Geva 
    Patchscopes: a unifying framework for inspecting hidden representations of language models. In 
    Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’24. Cited by: §2.
  • Giulianelli et al. (2018) M. Giulianelli, J. Harding, F. Mohnert, D. Hupkes, and W. Zuidema 
    Under the hood: using diagnostic classifiers to investigate and improve how language models
    track agreement information. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing
    and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, T. Linzen, G. Chrupała, and A. Alishahi (Eds.), 
    Brussels, Belgium, pp. 240–248. External Links: Link, Document Cited by: Appendix G.
  • Hanna et al. (2023) M. Hanna, O. Liu, and A. Variengien How does GPT-2 compute greater-than?:
    interpreting mathematical abilities in a pre-trained language model. In Thirty-seventh
    Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, External Links: Link Cited by: §6.
  • Hanna and Mueller (2025) M. Hanna and A. Mueller Incremental sentence processing mechanisms in
    autoregressive transformer language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the
    Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
    Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), L. Chiruzzo, A. Ritter, and L. Wang (Eds.), 
    Albuquerque, New Mexico, pp. 3181–3203. External Links: Link, Document, ISBN 979-8-89176-189-6 
    Cited by: §6.
  • Hanna et al. (2025) M. Hanna, M. Piotrowski, J. Lindsey, and E. Ameisen Circuit-tracer. Note: 
    https://github.com/safety-research/circuit-tracerThe first two authors contributed equally and
    are listed alphabetically. Cited by: §A.1, §A.2, §3, §4.1, §7.
  • Huben et al. (2024) R. Huben, H. Cunningham, L. R. Smith, A. Ewart, and L. Sharkey Sparse
    autoencoders find highly interpretable features in language models. In The Twelfth
    International Conference on Learning Representations, External Links: Link Cited by: §A.1.
  • Kambhampati et al. (2024) S. Kambhampati, K. Valmeekam, L. Guan, M. Verma, K. Stechly, S.
    Bhambri, L. P. Saldyt, and A. B. Murthy Position: LLMs can’t plan, but can help planning in
    LLM-modulo frameworks. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, External
    Links: Link Cited by: footnote 1.
  • Korbak et al. (2025) T. Korbak, M. Balesni, E. Barnes, Y. Bengio, J. Benton, J. Bloom, M. Chen,
    A. Cooney, A. Dafoe, A. Dragan, S. Emmons, O. Evans, D. Farhi, R. Greenblatt, D. Hendrycks, M.
    Hobbhahn, E. Hubinger, G. Irving, E. Jenner, D. Kokotajlo, V. Krakovna, S. Legg, D. Lindner, D.
    Luan, A. Madry, J. Michael, N. Nanda, D. Orr, J. Pachocki, E. Perez, M. Phuong, F. Roger, J.
    Saxe, B. Shlegeris, M. Soto, E. Steinberger, J. Wang, W. Zaremba, B. Baker, R. Shah, and V.
    Mikulik Chain of thought monitorability: a new and fragile opportunity for ai safety. External
    Links: 2507.11473, Link Cited by: §1.
  • Lasri et al. (2022) K. Lasri, T. Pimentel, A. Lenci, T. Poibeau, and R. Cotterell Probing for
    the usage of grammatical number. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
    for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), S. Muresan, P. Nakov, and A.
    Villavicencio (Eds.), Dublin, Ireland, pp. 8818–8831. External Links: Link, Document Cited by:
    §6.
  • Lindsey et al. (2025) J. Lindsey, W. Gurnee, E. Ameisen, B. Chen, A. Pearce, N. L. Turner, C.
    Citro, D. Abrahams, S. Carter, B. Hosmer, J. Marcus, M. Sklar, A. Templeton, T. Bricken, C.
    McDougall, H. Cunningham, T. Henighan, A. Jermyn, A. Jones, A. Persic, Z. Qi, T. B. Thompson,
    S. Zimmerman, K. Rivoire, T. Conerly, C. Olah, and J. Batson On the biology of a large language
    model. Transformer Circuits Thread. External Links: Link Cited by: §1, §1, §2, §2, §4.3, §5, §6
    , §6, §7, §7.
  • Lindsey et al. (2024) J. Lindsey, A. Templeton, J. Marcus, T. Conerly, J. Batson, and C. Olah 
    Sparse crosscoders for cross-layer features and model diffing. Transformer Circuits Thread. 
    External Links: Link Cited by: §A.1.
  • Maar et al. (2025) J. Maar, D. Paperno, C. McDougall, and N. Nanda What’s the plan? Metrics for
    implicit planning in LLMs and their application to rhyme generation. Note: In preparation Cited
    by: §6, §7.
  • Marks et al. (2025) S. Marks, C. Rager, E. J. Michaud, Y. Belinkov, D. Bau, and A. Mueller 
    Sparse feature circuits: discovering and editing interpretable causal graphs in language models
    . In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, External Links: Link 
    Cited by: §1, §3, §6.
  • Marks and Tegmark (2024) S. Marks and M. Tegmark The geometry of truth: emergent linear
    structure in large language model representations of true/false datasets. In First Conference
    on Language Modeling, External Links: Link Cited by: Appendix G.
  • McCoy et al. (2024) R. T. McCoy, S. Yao, D. Friedman, M. D. Hardy, and T. L. Griffiths Embers
    of autoregression show how large language models are shaped by the problem they are trained to
    solve. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121 (41), pp. e2322420121. External
    Links: Document, Link, https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.2322420121 Cited by: §4.1.
  • Meinke et al. (2025) A. Meinke, B. Schoen, J. Scheurer, M. Balesni, R. Shah, and M. Hobbhahn 
    Frontier models are capable of in-context scheming. External Links: 2412.04984, Link Cited by:
    §8.
  • Nainani et al. (2025) J. Nainani, S. Vaidyanathan, C. Watts, A. N. Assis, and A. Rigg Detecting
    and characterizing planning in language models. External Links: 2508.18098, Link Cited by: §6.
  • Nanda and Bloom (2022) N. Nanda and J. Bloom TransformerLens. Note: https://github.com/
    TransformerLensOrg/TransformerLens Cited by: Appendix G.
  • Olah et al. (2020) C. Olah, N. Cammarata, L. Schubert, G. Goh, M. Petrov, and S. Carter Zoom
    in: an introduction to circuits. Distill. Note: https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in 
    External Links: Document Cited by: §6.
  • Olah et al. (2017) C. Olah, A. Mordvintsev, and L. Schubert Feature visualization. Distill. 
    External Links: Link, Document Cited by: §A.1, §3.
  • Olshausen and Field (1997) B. A. Olshausen and D. J. Field Sparse coding with an overcomplete
    basis set: a strategy employed by v1?. Vision Research 37 (23), pp. 3311–3325. External Links: 
    ISSN 0042-6989, Document, Link Cited by: §A.1.
  • Pal et al. (2023) K. Pal, J. Sun, A. Yuan, B. Wallace, and D. Bau Future lens: anticipating
    subsequent tokens from a single hidden state. In Proceedings of the 27th Conference on
    Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), J. Jiang, D. Reitter, and S. Deng (Eds.), 
    Singapore, pp. 548–560. External Links: Link, Document Cited by: §1, §2.
  • Pochinkov (2025) N. Pochinkov ParaScopes: do language models plan the upcoming paragraph?. 
    External Links: Link Cited by: §1, §2.
  • Ravfogel et al. (2021) S. Ravfogel, G. Prasad, T. Linzen, and Y. Goldberg Counterfactual
    interventions reveal the causal effect of relative clause representations on agreement
    prediction. In Proceedings of the 25th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, 
    A. Bisazza and O. Abend (Eds.), Online, pp. 194–209. External Links: Link, Document Cited by:
    Appendix G.
  • Ravichander et al. (2021) A. Ravichander, Y. Belinkov, and E. Hovy Probing the probing
    paradigm: does probing accuracy entail task relevance?. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference
    of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, P.
    Merlo, J. Tiedemann, and R. Tsarfaty (Eds.), Online, pp. 3363–3377. External Links: Link,
    Document Cited by: §2.
  • Sawicki et al. (2023) P. Sawicki, M. Grzes, F. Góes, D. Brown, M. Peeperkorn, and A. Khatun 
    Bits of grass: does gpt already know how to write like whitman?. In ICCC, pp. 317–321. External
    Links: Link Cited by: §6.
  • Suvarna et al. (2024) A. Suvarna, H. Khandelwal, and N. Peng PhonologyBench: evaluating
    phonological skills of large language models. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Towards
    Knowledgeable Language Models (KnowLLM 2024), S. Li, M. Li, M. J. Zhang, E. Choi, M. Geva, P.
    Hase, and H. Ji (Eds.), Bangkok, Thailand, pp. 1–14. External Links: Link, Document Cited by:
    §6.
  • Wang et al. (2023) K. R. Wang, A. Variengien, A. Conmy, B. Shlegeris, and J. Steinhardt 
    Interpretability in the wild: a circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small. In 
    The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, External Links: Link Cited
    by: §6.
  • Warstadt et al. (2020) A. Warstadt, A. Parrish, H. Liu, A. Mohananey, W. Peng, S. Wang, and S.
    R. Bowman BLiMP: the benchmark of linguistic minimal pairs for English. Transactions of the
    Association for Computational Linguistics 8, pp. 377–392. External Links: Link, Document Cited
    by: §6.
  • Wu et al. (2024) W. Wu, J. X. Morris, and L. Levine Do language models plan ahead for future
    tokens?. In First Conference on Language Modeling, External Links: Link Cited by: §2.
  • Yang et al. (2025) A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao, C.
    Huang, C. Lv, C. Zheng, D. Liu, F. Zhou, F. Huang, F. Hu, H. Ge, H. Wei, H. Lin, J. Tang, J.
    Yang, J. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Yang, J. Zhou, J. Zhou, J. Lin, K. Dang, K. Bao, K. Yang, L.
    Yu, L. Deng, M. Li, M. Xue, M. Li, P. Zhang, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Men, R. Gao, S. Liu, S. Luo,
    T. Li, T. Tang, W. Yin, X. Ren, X. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Ren, Y. Fan, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang,
    Y. Wan, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Cui, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhou, and Z. Qiu Qwen3 technical report. External
    Links: 2505.09388, Link Cited by: §4.1.

Appendix A Details of Transcoders and Feature Circuits

A.1 Transcoders

In this section we provide details on transcoders in general and the specific transcoders we use.

Transcoders

Past work has attempted to characterize the features encoded in model activations by examining the
inputs that most strongly activate each neuron (dimension) of a given activation vector. However,
interpreting neurons is difficult, as they are seldom zero and often polysemantic, firing for
multiple reasons (Olah et al., 2017, Elhage et al., 2022). Sparse dictionary learning solves this
problem by decomposing activations into sparse and (ideally) monosemantic feature vectors (
Olshausen and Field, 1997, Bricken et al., 2023). As only a few dimensions, or features, of the
vector are active on a given input, and each feature fires on only one concept, these are much
easier to interpret.

Sparse dictionaries come in many forms. Sparse autoencoders (SAEs; Bricken et al., 2023, Huben et
al., 2024) are the most common type, encoding and reconstructing activations from the same
location. We use per-layer transcoders, which encode MLP inputs and reconstruct MLP outputs (
Dunefsky et al., 2024); see Figure 7 for a diagram. Lindsey et al. (2024) also introduce 
cross-layer transcoders, which take in MLP inputs, and are jointly trained to predict contributions
to all downstream MLPs’ outputs. These are generally sparser (for a given level of reconstruction
error) but also more computationally costly to train and more memory-intensive to deploy.
Importantly, while Ameisen et al. (2025) use cross-layer transcoders for their circuit-finding,
per-layer transcoders can also be used.

Formally, a (per-layer) transcoder takes in activations 𝐡∈ℝd\mathbf{h}\in\mathbb{R}^{d} from a
given MLP’s inputs, computes the sparse representation 𝐳∈ℝn\mathbf{z}\in\mathbb{R}^{n}, and
reconstructs the MLP’s output activations 𝐡′∈ℝd\mathbf{h}^{\prime}\in\mathbb{R}^{d} as follows:

 𝐳\displaystyle\mathbf{z}       =f⁡(𝐖e​n​c​𝐡+𝐛e​n​c)\displaystyle=f\left(\mathbf{W}_{enc}\      (1)
                                mathbf{h}+\mathbf{b}_{enc}\right)
 𝐡′~\displaystyle\tilde{\mathbf =𝐖d​e​c​𝐳+𝐛d​e​c,\displaystyle=\mathbf{W}_{dec}\mathbf{z}+\     (2)
 {h}^{\prime}}                  mathbf{b}_{dec},

Here, ff is an activation function (often ReLU, JumpReLU, or Top-kk), and 𝐖e​n​c,𝐛e​n​c,𝐖d​e​c,\
mathbf{W}_{enc},\mathbf{b}_{enc},\mathbf{W}_{dec}, and 𝐛d​e​c\mathbf{b}_{dec} are learned
parameters. LLM transcoders are trained to minimize both the MSE between 𝐡′\mathbf{h}^{\prime} and
𝐡′~\tilde{\mathbf{h}^{\prime}} and the norm of 𝐳\mathbf{z}^2^2 2 This is often done by penalizing 𝐳
\mathbf{z}’s L1L_{1} norm. However, note that some activation functions, namely Top-kk and
variants, inherently limit the number of active features, making this unnecessary.. The LLM is
frozen, and the transcoder trains on up to billions of tokens. The reduction in polysemanticity is
achieved by setting the sparse representation size to be much larger than the input size. In doing
so, one reduces the pressure on the model to cram many features into a small number of dimensions,
as is thought to cause polysemanticity (Elhage et al., 2022).

We interpret the iith feature of a given transcoder by displaying the inputs that maximize its
activation 𝐳i\mathbf{z}_{i}. We also display the tokens whose unembedding vectors have the highest
and lowest dot product with the feature’s column in 𝐖d​e​c\mathbf{W}_{dec}; these are the
vocabulary items that it directly up- and downweights. See Figure 1 for example feature
visualizations, used to manually label features.

We often intervene with respect to transcoder features, to verify our interpretation of a given
feature. To do so, we take the original feature vector 𝐳\mathbf{z} and perform desired
interventions on it by e.g. zeroing out a feature’s activation, yielding 𝐳′\mathbf{z}^{\prime}. We
compute Δ=𝐖d​e​c​(𝐳′−𝐳)\Delta=\mathbf{W}_{dec}\left(\mathbf{z}^{\prime}-\mathbf{z}\right), and add
Δ\Delta to the output of the corresponding MLP during the model’s forward pass.


Figure 7: A diagram of a transcoder. The transcoder takes in the dense MLP inputs, computes a
sparse representation thereof, and then reconstructs the MLP’s dense outputs.

Qwen-3 Transcoders

For our experiments, we use Hanna et al.’s (2025) Qwen-3 transcoders. These circuits are ReLU
transcoders, all with a hidden dimension of 163840. They take in MLP inputs post-input-LayerNorm,
and predict the MLP’s outputs.

A.2 Transcoder Feature Circuits

Formally, feature circuits are weighted acyclic digraphs. The source nodes are input embeddings and
nodes corresponding to each transcoder’s reconstruction error 𝐡′~−𝐡′\tilde{\mathbf{h}^{\prime}}-\
mathbf{h}^{\prime}. These flow through transcoder feature nodes, to nodes that correspond to a
given vocabulary item’s logit. Each edge’s weight is the direct effect of the source node on the
target, i.e. the source node’s effect on the target’s value, unmediated by other nodes.

We compute feature circuits using Ameisen et al.’s (2025) algorithm, which works as follows.

Local Replacement Model

The first step of attribution is to incorporate the transcoders into the model’s computations for a
given input. We thus replace the model’s MLPs with their corresponding transcoders, plus a
reconstruction error term equal to the difference between the MLP’s output and the transcoder’s
reconstruction. This yields a local replacement model, which behaves identically to the original
model, but only on the given input, as reconstruction error terms are input-specific.


Figure 8: A 2-layer transformer LM, and its corresponding local replacement model. We replace
model’s MLPs with transcoders, as well as error terms unique to the given input. The attention
patterns (from the QK matrix) have been frozen, detaching them from the computation graph. Despite
this, the OV-matrix of each attention block is still attached. Thus, when we refer to e.g. the
direct effect of a feature of the layer-0 transcoder on a vocabulary logit, this direct effect may
pass through the residual stream alone, or additionally through the OV matrix of the attention, a
linear transformation. The direct effect of any given feature on any other feature (or any
vocabulary logit) is thus linear. See Elhage et al. (2021) for more on QK/OV matrices and the
residual stream.

We next freeze the model’s attention patterns and denominators of any layer normalization terms,
treating them as constant values; this entails detaching them from the graph (.detach() in
Pytorch). See Figure 8 for a depiction of this process. We also detach the transcoder feature
activations themselves, so no gradients flow through them.

In so detaching these components, we remove all nonlinearities from our local replacement model:
both the attention softmax nonlinearity and the normalization nonlinearities are gone. The
activation of any given feature is now linear in the activations of the nodes prior to it. This
simplifies the process of computing the direct effect of one node on another, and means that these
direct effect values are exact; however, they will not account for features’ impact on the model’s
attention patterns.

Attribution

We can thus compute the direct effects of a source node on a target node as follows. We define an
input vector for the target node: if the node is a feature, this is its input vector (from 𝐖e​n​c\
mathbf{W}_{enc}), and if the node is a logit, this is the corresponding unembedding vector, minus
the mean unembedding vector. We inject this gradient at the node’s input location—either the MLP
input for transcoder features, or the final residual stream for logit nodes; this injection can
also be operationalized as a dot product with the residual stream, followed by a .backward() call.
Then, for each upstream node, its direct effect is the gradient at its output location, multiplied
by its output vector: the input embedding or error vector for input and error nodes respectively,
or the source feature’s activation multiplied by its decoder vector, for feature nodes. With each
call of .backward(), we find weights for all edges into the target node; repeating this for all
nodes attributes the whole attribution graph.

Methods

We limit attribution to the top 7500 most influential feature nodes, as remaining nodes are
unlikely to be important, and attributing from many nodes leads to large graphs that fit poorly in
memory. We determine which nodes are most influential by intermittently computing each node’s
influence using the procedure described in Ameisen et al. (2025). For logit nodes, we choose to
attribute from the minimum required to capture 0.95 of the model’s next-token probability, or the
top 10 logit nodes, whichever is smaller (generally the former). Ultimately, the attribution
process is quick, from seconds for Qwen-3 (0.6B) to a minute or two for Qwen-3 (14B).

For visualization purposes, it is often useful to prune graphs, removing low-influence nodes and
edges. As done by Ameisen et al. (2025), we do so by computing the total influence of each node and
edge in the circuit. We then set a threshold for each, and take the minimum number of top nodes /
edges that sum to that influence; we choose nodes whose influence sums to 80% of the total, and
edges whose influence sums to 98%. Our circuit-finding interface, provided by circuit-tracer (Hanna
et al., 2025), is shown in Figure 9.

Refer to caption
Figure 9: The interface used for circuit visualization / annotation, from circuit-tracer.

Appendix B Simple Planning Dataset Details

We construct three datasets for testing simple planning, the a/an, is/are, and el/la datasets. The 
a/an dataset consists of 108 examples of professions (86 requiring a and 22 requiring an) and
descriptions thereof. These were augmented with 350 concrete nouns (267 a / 83 an) and descriptions
thereof. All descriptions were generated by Claude 4 Sonnet, but filtered manually and rewritten if
necessary, e.g. because they were too vague. The is/are dataset was generated programmatically, and
consists of (positive) differences between numbers ranging from 1 and 9; the animals are sampled
from a manually curated list of 10 animals. This yields 360 examples. The el/la dataset, much like 
a/an, consists of 411 concrete nouns (223 el / 188 la) and Spanish-language descriptions thereof.
Again, all descriptions were generated by Claude 4 Sonnet, but filtered manually and rewritten if
necessary.

Note that, in the case of the a/an dataset, one randomly-sampled in-context example from our
dataset is prepended to each input to the model in order to encourage it to output a/an; otherwise,
the model does not understand the task structure, and outputs other tokens. The full prompt is thus
something like Someone who provides treatment for physical or mental conditions is a therapist.
Someone who heals sick pets is. This is fed directly to the model as the user input, and the model
simply completes the input (rather than generating a separate assistant response). The el/la
dataset is formatted in the same way.

Similarly, we prepend is/are examples with Repeat and finish the following sentence:, as we found
that this increased performance over simply sampling next tokens without requesting the repetition.
The full prompt is thus something like /no_think Repeat this sentence and complete it. At first
there were 2 cats. Then, 1 went away. Now, there. The /no_think prevents models from thinking
before answering. During attribution, we prefill the model’s assistant response with <think>\n\n</
think>\n At first there were 2 cats. Then, 1 went away. Now, there. We then attribute back from the
top logits (which are always is and/or are).


Figure 10: Left: Recall of is and are on the is/are dataset, by model. Models below 8B in size
mostly fail to predict is, while larger models perform perfectly. All models can predict are. Right
: The mean proportion of influence flowing through planning nodes in the is/are dataset, by model,
verb, and correctness; recall that the only incorrect examples are small models failing to predict 
is. The most influence flows through the planning nodes in the is examples, where more planning
nodes are present. Still, more influence flows through these nodes in correct than incorrect is
examples.

Appendix C Is-Are Results

Here, we report results for experiments on the is/are dataset, which largely mirror those performed
on the a/an dataset. Figure 10 (left) shows that models behave similarly on the is/are to the is/
are dataset: all models do well on the majority class are. Models below 8B in size fail (0.6-1.7B)
or perform poorly on the task when the correct answer is is; Qwen3-4B scores just below chance.
Starting at 8B, models score perfectly on is as well, just as with a/an.

We perform circuit analysis on is/are dataset as well, and find similar, but not identical trends
compared to the a/an case. Models again have features corresponding to planning features some of
the time. However, 1 features (and 2 and 3 features to a lesser extent) are more common than other
numbers’ features. Whether this is a real phenomenon (models have special representations for lower
numbers due to their frequency) or a transcoder-driven phenomenon (higher numbers also have
corresponding features, but transcoders miss these) is unclear. This may also be related to the
fact that such features are more important / necessary in the minority class case (1/is) than in
the majority class case. In the case where such features do exist, we also observe that e.g. 1
features activate features that induce the model to say is.


Figure 11: Left: Change in p⁡(correct verb)p(\textit{correct verb}) caused by zero and multiplying
interventions on planning features. The former generally harm performance, while the latter improve
it. Both affect only is examples, which have the most planning nodes, and also are the only
examples models answer incorrectly. Right: Change in p⁡(correct verb)p(\textit{correct verb})
caused by direct zero and multiplying interventions on planning features. As before, these are
relatively ineffective, though less so than in the a/an case.

We perform the flow and intervention experiments done on the a/an dataset. These are complicated
somewhat by the fact that there are more planning nodes in the is case than in any of the are
cases, and that models do not fail on are cases. Still, in Figure 10 (right), we can see that in
the is case, more influence flows through the planning nodes in correct than incorrect examples, as
in the a/an dataset. Moreover, Figure 11 (right) shows that both zeroing and multiplicative
interventions are effective on is examples. This is likely because these have the most planning
nodes; however, it may also be related to the fact that is is the minority class, and “needs” these
features more.

Appendix D El-La Results


Figure 12: Left: Recall of el and la examples by Qwen-3 models. Unlike in prior examples, the
majority class (el) is not perfectly captured by any model, though recall is generally high.
Moreover, while performance on the minority class la improves with scale, recall is ultimately
still middling. Right: Interventions performed with respect to el/la planning features fail
primarily due to a lack of said planning features.

Here, we report results for experiments on the is/are dataset, which are much less successful than
those performed on the a/an or is/are datasets. When we behaviorally test the models on this task,
we find (Figure 12, left) that performance is worse than on the prior two tasks. The majority class
el is not always correctly predicted, though performance stays steadily high as in other tasks.
Moreover, while recall of the minority class an does improve with model scale, it never exceeds
0.6, unlike on other tasks, where it reaches near 1.0.

We then perform the causal interventions, using as planning nodes those that either in Spanish or
in English, as we observe that some examples have English nodes corresponding to the hypothetically
planned word. However, we find (Figure 12, right) that the interventions have little effect; this
goes for both zero and multiplying interventions.

We believe that this is primarily driven by a lack of planning features active on these examples.
In general, while we can find some planning features, Qwen-3 models simply have much fewer than
they do on the a/an dataset, despite their formats being very similar. This may be because Qwen-3
is not highly capable in language besides English and Chinese (which exhibits little syntactic
agreement); further studies could examine more multilingually capable models.

Appendix E Model Performance on Non-Planning Aspects of Simple Planning Tasks

The fact that small models fail to plan on the simple a/an and is/are planning tasks may raise the
question: do small models fail because they cannot perform the tasks at all? To show this is not
the case, we generate models’ planned tokens, both given the correct next token, and the incorrect
next token. We then measure whether the output token in each case matches our expected planned
token.


Figure 13: Left: Planned word accuracy, i.e. whether the model’s predicted word matches the
intended word, when given the correct or incorrect article. Models above 4B in size are highly
accurate when given the correct article (>80%>80\%), and even smaller model achieve moderate
accuracies. Given the wrong article, accuracies are lower, but still non-zero, indicating that
models may have a strong planning goal that prevails even when the word is at odds with the
article. Right: Planned word accuracy given the wrong article, by correct article (a or an). Though
accuracy is low, models succeed on both a and an examples, indicating that successes are not driven
by one class.


Figure 14: Number accuracy, i.e. whether the model’s predicted number of animals matches the
intended number, when given the correct or incorrect verb (is / are). Notably, small models produce
the correct number regardless of whether they are given the correct or incorrect verb. In contrast,
Qwen3-14B and 32B have starkly reduced accuracy when given the wrong verb form.

Performance differs by task. On the a/an task (Figure 13, left), models have generally high
accuracy (>0.6>0.6) when given the correct next token, but lower accuracy when given the incorrect
one; the highest scoring models in that scenario achieve an accuracy of 0.3-0.4. Baseline accuracy
here is in theory near 0, as models can predict any word. This suggests that although models are
not always planning for the precise word we intend (and indeed, there are cases where we find no
nodes corresponding to the planned word) they often are. And in some cases, they plan so strongly
for the intended word that they output it even when it conflicts with the article.

This trend is much stronger on the is/are task. Our results from the analogous experiment (Figure 
14) show perfect accuracy for all models when the correct verb form is given. Given the incorrect
article, smaller models are (near-)perfectly accurate at predicting the correct number, but larger
models (Qwen3-14B and 32B) perform much worse. This provides strong evidence that small models can
perform the task (and that a lack of task abilities does not underlie their poor planning
performance). However, the root of the behavior of large models is less clear. They appear to be
more sensitive to (subject-verb) agreement, and thus produce outputs that agree with the number of
the verb; in particular, given is as an incorrect next token, they tend to output 1, rather than a
number that agrees with the original animal quantities. In contrast, weak models do produce outputs
like …now there are 1 dog remaining.

Appendix F Random Interventions

In order to ensure that our have not succeeded by random chance, we perform all-effects ablations
on random active features in our a/an and is/are datasets. For an example where we normally
intervene on nn features, we sample another nn features from the pool of all active last-position
features, and record the effects of the intervention. The results (Figure 15) indicate that these
random interventions are ineffective: neither the zero ablations nor the multiplying interventions
work.


Figure 15: Effects of random features interventions on the a/an (left) and is/are (right) tasks.
Neither intervention has a large effect on either dataset, indicating that our interventions do not
succeed by random chance.

Appendix G Animal Probing and Intervention Experiments

As done by Dong et al. (2025), we set up probing experiments as follows. We take 1000 stories from
the validation set of Tinystories, and extract the first sentence. We then feed each first sentence
to the model in the following prompt: Here’s the first sentence of a story: {sentence1}. Continue
this story with one sentence that introduces a new animal character. We then generate (greedy
sampling) a next sentence, and recorded the animal contained therein.

We then filter this data down to only the datapoints containing the top-4 most common animals;
typically, this leaves 600 or more examples. We then split the data 60/20/20 into train,
validation, and test, and collected (transformer layer output) activations from the last token of
each prompt. We then train a single-layer MLP probe to predict the animal that the model would
predict, from these activations. We use a hidden dimension of 64 for our MLPs, as Dong et al.
report that performance plateaus at d=64d=64. We run this analysis on all Qwen3 models, as well as
on Llama-3-8B-Instruct, used by Dong et al., and report results across hidden layers in. Figure 16
shows that our results on Llama-3 (8B) are similar to the original findings, with high F1 scores
(0.6-0.7) across all layers but the first. Probing results for other models are varied; Qwen3-8B
and 32B perform well (F1 near 0.6), while other models exhibit middling performance (F1 <0.5<0.5).


Figure 16: Macro F1 scores when probing models’ last-token representations for the animal that the
model will output in the following sentence, by model layer. F1 scores are high for certain
models—Llama-3 (8B) and Qwen-3 (8B/32B)—but notably lower for others.

We then verify the causal relevance of the features found by these probes. If the probe has found a
causally relevant feature at the end of the prompt that determines the animal that is output,
altering that feature should alter the animal that is output. There are a variety of interventions
that could be used to verify the features found by the probe: Ravfogel et al. (2021) intervening by
reflecting representations across probe decision boundaries, while Giulianelli et al. (2018)
compute the gradient of the probe’s prediction (error) with respect to the model representations,
and update the representations based on this. We could also use less probe-specific interventions
like difference in means (Marks and Tegmark, 2024).

We opt for a simpler intervention: we pair each prompt in our dataset with a random prompt that led
to the production of a distinct animal. We then generate a continuation to the first prompt, but
patch the last-token activations of the second prompt onto the last token of the first prompt. We
do so at all layers, effectively replacing all model activations at this position. This means that
the next generated token is guaranteed to be the next token of the second prompt; furthermore,
attention back to the patched position will receive the patched values. Since we have patched all
possible layers in which the relevant features could reside, this intervention should cause the
model to produce the animal from the second prompt, if the probed features are relevant. We perform
this intervention across the same set of models as the previous experiment, with the exception of
Qwen3-32B, as it is not supported by TransformerLens (Nanda and Bloom, 2022), the interpretability
framework we use.


Figure 17: Success rates of our patching intervention, where we patch one prompt (p2p_{2})’s last
token activations onto another (p1p_{1})’s last token during generation. We report both exact match
(True if the output animal is p2p_{2}’s animal) and any change (True if the output animal differs
from p1p_{1}’s original animal). In general, exact match is low, below 10%, while any change is
higher, but under 30%.

Our results (Figure 17) suggest that the features found are not highly causally relevant. In
relatively few cases (<10%<10\% for all models) do we observe the output animal change that of the
second prompt. In fact, in the majority of cases, the output animal does not change at all. This
seems to be a violation of our Condition 1, that the found feature must have a causal impact on the
model’s planned token. We note, however, that Llama-3 (8B), the only model from Dong et al. that we
test, does have higher intervention efficacy. Moreover, if there are multiple features relevant for
planning the animal to be produced, it would be necessary to find and intervene on all of these to
produce a strong effect.

Despite this, we find it unlikely that planning takes place in this scenario. This is because the
continuations corresponding to each animal output are generic: they do not hint to animal that will
be produced. Consider, for example, the prompt and continuation Mia and Dad were busy polishing
their car…As they worked, a small, curious fox darted into the garage, tail wagging playfully. The
left context of fox imposes few constraints on the animal that is to follow; many animals can be 
small and curious. This hints that our Condition 2 may not be fulfilled here either: the model does
not actually have to plan / prepare a context that licenses the animal eventually output.

Appendix H Couplet circuit details

H.1 Couplet Dataset and Samples

Our couplets dataset was created by prompting Qwen-3 (32B) with the prompt “/no_think You are a
creative poet. Produce ONLY the first line of a rhyming couplet about the topic: ’{topic}’. Return
a single poetic line and nothing else.”. We sampled 5 couplets per prompt, kept only the first line
of each couplet, and manually filtered these for well-formedness. We used the following topics:
love (romantic, familial, self-love); death and mortality; coming of age; war and conflict; nature
and the environment; home and belonging; identity and self-discovery; joy and happiness; anxiety
and fear; loneliness and alienation; nostalgia and memory; hope and despair; anger and frustration;
family bonds (siblings, parent-child); friendship; betrayal and trust; first love; marriage and
commitment; loss of loved ones; childhood memories; aging and growing older; seasons and cycles;
historical moments; the passage of time; immortality and legacy; justice and injustice; freedom and
oppression; cultural identity; social alienation; tradition vs. modernity; community and belonging;
weather and climate; animals and wildlife; urban vs. rural life; travel and journeys; food and
taste; colors, sounds, and textures; dreams and aspirations; perfection and imperfection; truth and
deception; power and powerlessness; spirituality and faith; art and creativity.

We then sampled couplet completions from the Qwen-3 models using the prompt: “/no_think Write only
the next line of this rhyming couplet: {first_line}”.

For convenience, we provide 5 example first lines of couplets and completions below.

First line: Two hearts entwined where vows take root, Qwen3-0.6B: And where the stars are born,
they sing. Qwen3-1.7B: two souls forever bound in love. Qwen3-4B: A love that grows beyond all
doubt. Qwen3-8B: A love that time cannot undo. Qwen3-14B: A love that grows in tender fruit. 
Qwen3-32B: A love that time and distance can’t undo.

First line: Whispers of dread in the quietest breath, Qwen3-0.6B: A shadowed path to the dark,
where the night is kind. Qwen3-1.7B: And shadows that dance in the darkest keep. Qwen3-4B: Shadows
creep where the light dare not reach. Qwen3-8B: A shadowed path where no light dares tread. 
Qwen3-14B: A shadow that creeps through the darkness of death. Qwen3-32B: Shadows conspire as the
night takes its death.

First line: Whispers of wind through the emerald trees, Qwen3-0.6B: The moonlight dances on the
water’s edge. Qwen3-1.7B: Soft as dreams, they drift and sigh. Qwen3-4B: Singing the hush of a
summer breeze. Qwen3-8B: Sing a lullaby to the sleeping breeze. Qwen3-14B: Softly they sing as the
daylight decreases. Qwen3-32B: Singing soft lullabies to the leaves.

First line: Whispers of winter kiss the thawing spring, Qwen3-0.6B: The frost has passed, and the
snow has gone, Qwen3-1.7B: and silence bows to the bloom of the green. Qwen3-4B: Blossoms rise in
quiet, fragile song. Qwen3-8B: Beneath the snow, the seeds begin to sing. Qwen3-14B: Blossoms
awaken where the frost once clung. Qwen3-32B: Melting dreams in a tender, fleeting sting.

First line: A promise made in shadows, torn by dawn’s deceitful light, Qwen3-0.6B: A shadowed vow,
once kept, now lost, Qwen3-1.7B: Yet still, the heart remains true to what it Qwen3-4B: A vow now
lost in the glare of day. Qwen3-8B: A vow once whispered fades into the night. Qwen3-14B: A heart
once whole now fractured, lost in endless, silent night. Qwen3-32B: A truth once held so sacred,
now lies shattered in the fight.

H.2 Circuit Verification


Figure 18: A: Effects of intervening on end-of-line (EOL) features. Upweighting them in the second
line causes the line to end early, while downweighting them causes it to continue for longer than
normal. B: Effect of upweighting near-end of line (NEOL) features in the second line. Upweighting
these causes the model to emit a rhyme over 2 words earlier than normal. C: Effects of
downweighting EOL features at the end of the first line, downweighting NEOL features in the second
line, or ablating rhyming-relevant attention heads’ patterns. The first two interventions
drastically decrease the model’s propensity to produce a rhyme, indicating that they help enable
rhyming. The last is less effective, but still reduces accuracy far below the original, 100%
accuracy. D: Rhyming accuracy when ablating original rhyming features, and upweighting those from
another rhyme group. Larger models switch to the new rhyme group with 40% accuracy—lower than their
original rhyming accuracy, but still relatively high.

Here, we discuss the experiments performed to verify our circuit, which we claim acts via
end-of-line, near-end-of-line, and rhyming features. We test these features as follows:

End-of-line (EOL) features

We define EOL features as those where 7 out of the feature’s top 10 activations immediately precede
a token containing a newline, e.g. “.\n”. We test that 1) activating these features prior to the
end of the second line causes models to end the line prematurely, 2) deactivating these features
after the model has completed the second line with a rhyme causes models to continue the line,
instead, and 3) deactivating these features at the end of the first line causes the model to fail
to rhyme, as EOL features regulate its attention to rhyming features.

For each of these experiments, we identify EOL features on each example as those that are active on
the last word of the couplet’s first line. We perform each experiment only on those couplets for
which we have performed attribution. For experiment 1), we provide the model with the couplet’s
first line and the first 2 tokens of the second. We set the EOL features to 5 times their original
values at the final position of this input, and any generated positions. We then allow the model to
generate, using greedy sampling. We record the length of generation (in tokens) before the model
outputs a newline, and compare it to the length of the original line.

For experiment 2), we provide the model with each entire, completed couplet (stripping any
punctuation at the end), and set all EOL features to -5 times their original values. We do this at
the final position of this input, and any generated positions. We use the model to generate, using
greedy sampling, and record the length of the model’ new generation, compared to that of the
original.

For experiment 3), we provide the model with the first line of each couplet, and let it generate
the next couplet (with greedy sampling), while setting all EOL features to -5 times their original
values at the end of the first line. We then record rhyming accuracy.

Figure 18A shows the results of experiments 1) and 2). Upweighting EOL features indeed causes
models to end the second line early, resulting in a large negative difference in line length. In
contrast, downweighting said features prevents models from ever finishing a line, resulting in very
long lines, relative to the original. Figure 18C shows the results of experiment 3). The rhyming
accuracy for larger models (larger than 0.6B) is low, below 0.2; this is despite the fact that we
perform the intervention on examples for which we have computed circuits, which are examples on
which models succeed. This means that downweighting EOL features at the end of the first line
seriously hindered performance. Moreover, qualitative inspection of the model’s outputs showed no
harm to the overall fluency of the completions, suggesting that this was not due to general harm to
the model’s abilities. This suggests that the EOL features do play an important role in regulating
rhyming abilities, likely through the keys of attention heads, which tell them where to attend to.

Near-end-of-line (NEOL) features

We define NEOL features as those where 7 out of the feature’s top 10 activations occur 2-4 tokens
before a token containing a newline, e.g. “.\n”. We test that 1) activating these features at the
beginning of the line causes models emit a rhyme early, and that 2) deactivating them stops models
from rhyming.

For each of these experiments, we identify NEOL features on each example as those that are active
on the second to last word of the couplet’s second line, i.e. on the token before the rhyming word.
We perform each experiment only on those couplets for which we have performed attribution. For
experiment 1), we provide the model with the couplet’s first line and the first 3 tokens of the
second. We set the NEOL features to 5 times their original values at the final position of this
input, and any generated positions. We then allow the model to generate, using greedy sampling. We
record the length of generation (in tokens) before the model outputs a rhyming word, and compare it
to the length of the original line.

For experiment 2), we provide the model with each couplet’s first line, and set all NEOL features
to -5 times their original values. We do this at the final position of this input, and any future
positions. We sample a second line from the model using greedy sampling, and record rhyming
accuracy.

Figure 18B shows the results of experiment 1). Upweighting NEOL features causes models to rhyme
early - over 2 tokens early, for models above 0.6B. This suggests that the NEOL feature is causally
responsible for models’ output of a rhyming token. We note that this intervention qualitatively
frequently caused models to rhyme not just early, but also rhyme often: models sometimes output
multiple rhyming words (e.g. Beneath the gray lay stray), as if the need to rhyme (like the
upweighting of the NEOL feature) was ongoing.

Figure 18C shows the results of experiment 2). The rhyming accuracy for larger models (larger than
0.6B) is low, below 0.2, just like when we downweighted EOL; indeed. Once more, this is despite the
fact that we perform the intervention on examples for which we have created circuits, which are
examples on which models succeed. Downweighting NEOL features in the second line thus seriously
harmed performance. Similar to before, qualitative inspection of the model’s outputs showed no harm
to the overall fluency of the completions. Since these features act at the position where rhyming
occurs, we hypothesize that they affect the queries of attention heads that would otherwise bring
features over rhyming information, allowing models to then predict a rhyming word.

We thus also test this attention head theory. We record each model’s attention during a normal
forward pass, and when the NEOL features are strongly (-6x) downweighted. We then find the top-5
heads whose attention back to the end of the first line is reduced most by this ablation, averaged
across couplets. We hypothesize that these heads play a causal role in rhyming abilities. Thus, we
perform couplet generation as in the prior experiment, but transfer all of these 5 heads’ attention
back to the end of the first line, to the BOS token; we observe that this is what happens upon
ablation, and such tokens are generally considered to be attention sinks. We then record rhyming
accuracy.

Figure 18C shows the results of this experiment as well. This ablation is less effective than
directly intervening on NEOL features directly; rhyming accuracies are 20-30% higher, though far
below the 100% accuracy models achieved on the sentences for which we computed circuits. It is also
significantly more targeted: we only alter 2 attention probabilities in 5 heads, rather than
targeting many features.

Rhyming features

As discussed in the main text, we find rhyming features using a heuristic. We look for features
that activate on short tokens (all top-activating tokens are <<5 characters) that are distinct (no
more than 5 occurrences of the same token), and where 7 of the 10 top activating features either
start with the same vowel, or end with the same consonant. Manual inspection suggested that this
yields relatively high-precision but only moderate-recall recovery of these features.

We test that these features control the output rhyme, by deactivating each example’s original
rhyming features at the end of the first line of the couplet, and upweighting the rhyming features
of an example with a different rhyme. The resulting line should rhyme with the new example, not the
original.

As in the main text, our results (Figure 18D) suggest that these features are indeed responsible
for choosing the rhyme. Although accuracy is lower than on the original rhymes, it is moderate, and
near that of the models overall on rhyming couplets.

H.3 Intervening on Rhyming Features Changes Intermediate Tokens

We can test whether the intermediate context generated by the model changes at all upon rhyming
feature intervention. To do this, we take the original generation of the model on a couplet, and
its generation when its rhyming tokens are steered as in Section 5.3. We then record the length (in
tokens) of the longest prefix shared between the original and steered generation. As baselines, we
also compute the overlap between the original, greedy generation, and generations (both steered and
unsteered) that we sample with temperature 1.0. If the rhyming features are genuinely causing the
model to plan for future tokens, we should expect them to cause the model’s intermediate tokens to
change, more than temperature-based sampling would.


Figure 19: Length of the shared prefix between the original generation, generations with
temperature 1.0, and steered generations, both greedily sampled and with temperature 1.0. Error
bars show SE.

Our results (Figure 19) indicate that steering affects the intermediate context between the first
line and the rhyming token output. For smaller models (0.6B and 1.7B), this intervention do no more
than simple sampling does. But for larger models (8B and 14B), the effect of this intervention upon
generations exceeds that of normal sampling—even when combining the intervention with greedy
decoding. Thus, the intervention alters both the intermediate and final tokens that models output.

Appendix I Potential Local Planning Features

To find local planning features in couplet circuits, we search for features in our circuit that
upweight the rhyming word that is eventually output, or have one of their top-10 activations on
that word. We search at the position before that word is output; that is, we look for say X
features that are causally relevant even before the model outputs X. For a circuit in which this
could be occurring, see Figure 20.

Refer to caption
Figure 20: A feature circuit for a couplet ending in in the night. Unlike prior circuits, this
circuit involves a specific night feature that drives the production of the phrase in the night.

For each model, and each of its top-10 words by number of say X features, we steer on those say X
features, setting their activations to 3, 5, or 7 times their original values. We do so on 5-15
token fragments of sentences from the TinyStories dataset (Eldan and Li, 2023)—a neutral context
where models are not likely strongly planning. We then record whether each model eventually output 
X, and qualitatively inspect the outputs.

Qualitatively, we observe that steering can lead to the sorts of sensible generations we observed
in the poetry setting. Steering on the say “night” feature leads to generations such as One day, a
girl named Mia went for a walk. She saw a cat and started to follow it to turn into One day, a girl
named Mia went for a walk. She saw a cat in the night; notably, in the appears to specifically
license night. Similarly, steering on the say “dream” feature often leads to outputs like recurring
dream or American dream, i.e., contexts that are specific to dream.

However, this is not always the case. Steering too hard can cause the model to output the target
word even in infelicitous contexts, or to only output the word; some say X features seldom produce
the target word when steering. How can we measure whether the steering not only (1) produced the
word X, but also (2) maintained a coherent sentence (up to the point where the word X was output)
and (3) truly adapted the context to license X? We can measure (1) programmatically, but (2) and
(3) are harder. For coherence, we query Claude Sonnet 4.1 about the coherence of each steered
generation (Listing ); to verify that Claude is a good judge of coherence we annotate 100 examples
for coherence, and find high agreement (80%, where most disagreements come from Claude missing
incoherence).

To estimate models’ abilities at (3), we filter examples to include only those where (1) and (2)
are fulfilled; we also filter out any examples where the original and steered generation are
identical up until the word X is output, as adaptation has surely not occurred in such cases. Then,
we estimate how many of these examples fulfill (3) by manually annotating 100 examples per model
for whether they contain context adaptation that could indicate planning. For example, we look for
phrases like her own when steered towards own, or had a recurring dream when steered towards dream,
when the original generation did not contain similar phrases. We also mark as incorrect examples
that are ungrammatical / incoherent, but were missed by Claude in the first round of filtering, as
a model that is successfully adapting its context for a planned token should not produce such
outputs. We then plot these metrics.


Figure 21: Steering metrics by model size, averaged across steering strength. Overall, as model
size increases, the ability to elicit say X by steering increases. The model’s tendency to adapt
their context also appears to increase with size. Coherence is mixed, and appears unrelated to
model size. Ultimately, few examples fulfill all three conditions—10% in the best case.

Our results (Figure 21) indicate that larger models are more successful at steering towards X and
more likely to adapt their context to match X, though they are no more coherent than smaller
models. However, few examples actually fulfill all of these conditions: even in Qwen-3 (14B), only
10% of examples do so. So, while we believe that these features may be part of a generalized
phenomenon whereby models plan for words by boosting nn-grams that end in those words, our
uncertainty is rather high. Our current hypotheses still rely on qualitative evidence, and more
study is needed to understand the precise mechanisms by which these features work, and more
consistently elicit and measure planning behavior from them.

Claude 4.1 Sonnet Prompt. Note that we only employ the coherence judgments, as the contains-word
criterion can be checked programmatically, and we found Claude’s adapts-context responses
unreliable.

⬇
f"""I need you to analyze a text generation where a model was steered to include a specific word.
<input_prompt>
{input_text}
</input_prompt>
<baseline_generation>
{baseline_generation}
</baseline_generation>
<steered_generation>
{generation}
</steered_generation>
<steered_word>
{steered_word}
</steered_word>
Please analyze this generation and answer the following questions:
1. **Contains steered word**: Does the steered generation contain the exact word "{steered_word}"? 
(Look for exact match, case-insensitive)
2. **Coherence**: Is the steered generation coherent up to the target word. Is it natural, or does 
it show signs of breakdown such as:
- Excessive repetition of words or phrases
- Unnatural/nonsensical sentences
- Abrupt topic changes that don’t make sense
- Grammatical breakdown
- IMPORTANT: Focus on coherence up to the point where the steered word appears (or would appear). 
Ignore any incoherence that happens after the steered word.
3. **Context adaptation**: Compare the steered generation to the baseline generation, starting from
the input_prompt. Did the model modify the words immediately preceding where the steered word 
appears (or would appear) compared to the baseline? Look for changes like:
- Adding/changing articles ("a", "the", "an")
- Adding/changing prepositions ("in", "on", "at", "with")
- Changing verb forms or tenses
- Adding adjectives or modifiers
- Any other modifications that help the steered word fit better
IMPORTANT: For context adaptation, you must compare the steered generation against the baseline to 
see if modifications were made specifically to accommodate the steered word. Count the number of 
words that were added or changed immediately before where the steered word appears (or would appear
).
When counting adaptation words:
- Count new articles, adjectives, adverbs, or prepositions added before the steered word
- Count changed words that help the steered word fit better
- Do NOT count the steered word itself
- Focus on the immediate context (usually 1-3 words before the steered word)
- If the steered word was not present, there is no adaptation
Example 1:
input_text: "Once upon a time, there was a"
baseline: "Once upon a time, there was a young girl named Lily who lived in a small village"
steered_word: "day"
steered_generation: "Once upon a time, there was a day when all the day of day day day day"
contains steered word: yes
coherence: yes (the generation is coherent up to "day")
contain adaptation: no (day is inserted instead of young)
Example 2:
input_text: "Once upon a time, there was a little boy named"
baseline: "Once upon a time, there was a little boy named Timmy who loved to play with numbers. One
"
steered_word: "dream"
steered_generation: ""Once upon a time, there was a little boy named D. He had a recurring dream 
that he had""
contains steered word: yes
coherence: yes (the generation is coherent up to "day")
contain adaptation: yes (sets up dream with "he had a recurring")
Please provide your analysis in this exact format:
<analysis>
<coherence_explanation>Brief explanation of any coherence issues found</coherence_explanation>
<adaptation_explanation>Brief explanation of any context adaptations made compared to the baseline
</adaptation_explanation>
<contains_word>yes/no</contains_word>
<is_coherent>yes/no</is_coherent>
<adapted_context>yes/no</adapted_context>
<adaptation_word_count>number (0 if no adaptation, otherwise count of adapted words)</
adaptation_word_count>
</analysis>"""

Appendix J Comparison of Instruction-Tuned and Base Qwen-3 Models on A-An and Is-Are Tasks

Throughout this paper, we have analyzed the behavior of instruction-tuned Qwen-3 models. However,
it is unclear how the performance and mechanisms of said instruction-tuned models differs from that
of base models. We investigate this by running the Qwen-3 Base models, from 0.6B to 14B, on the a/
an and is/are. For the latter task, we reformulate the base model’s input to exclude the
instructions present in the original task (Repeat this sentence and complete it.), though we find
this to have little effect on the results.


Figure 22: Performance of base (dashed line) and instruction-tuned (solid line) models on the a/an
(left) and is/are (right) tasks.

Our results indicate that the base models outperform the instruction-tuned models on the a/an task
slightly (Figure 22, left): recall of the majority-article a is similar between the two, while the
base models have consistently higher recall of an at 1.7B parameters and above. By contrast, on the
is/are task (Figure 22, right), the instruct models significantly outperform the base models: while
both achieve high recall on are, only the instruct models eventually achieve high recall on is.
This is despite the fact that base models, too, are numerate enough to complete the task: even when
given the wrong verb, they output the correct number, much as the instruct models did.

These results indicate that neither model variant—base or instruction-tuned—strictly outperforms
the other. Rather, differences seem driven more by the data distribution: the a/an task is more
akin to pre-training data, while the is/are task involves math, a focus of instruction-tuning.

Appendix K Planning for Measure Words in Chinese

The most successful examples of backward planning are English agreement tasks, which raises the
question: can models perform backward planning in other languages or contexts? The relative weak
performance of Qwen-3 (14B) and smaller models makes adding complex tasks challenging, but we can
test agreement abilities in Chinese, in which Qwen models perform well.

We focus on the phenomenon of measure-word agreement in Chinese. Chinese uses measure words, which
function analogously to e.g. the word loaf (of bread) in English: rather than saying one bread, one
says one loaf of bread. Similarly, in Chinese, one person becomes

一个人(one [person-unit] person), while three pigs becomes

三头猪(three [livestock-unit] pigs). Notably, different nouns require different measure words, but
the measure word precedes the noun, much like a/an.

We can thus ask: given a context that indicates that a given noun will appear, do models engage in
forward planning for that noun? And do they also engage in backward planning to determine which
counter word should be used? Owing to our own limited knowledge of Chinese, we construct a smaller
set of 10 examples, which elicit distinct measure words:

 1. 1.
   
    他看见四位骑士骑着四…匹马。: He saw four knights upon 4…[measure-word] horses.

 2. 2.
   
    这套公寓有三…间卧室。: The apartment had 3…[measure-word] bedrooms.

 3. 3.
   
    他看见四位农夫赶着四…头牛。He saw four farmers with four…[measure-word] cows.

 4. 4.
   
    他看见四位调酒师端着四…杯鸡尾。: He saw four bartenders carrying four…[measure-word] cocktails.

 5. 5.
   
    她听到笼子里传来歌声。进去一看，里面是一…只鸟。: She heard singing from in the cage. Inside she
    saw a…[measure-word] bird.

 6. 6.
   
    剧团刚刚表演完一…出话剧。: The theater troupe had performed a…[measure-word] play.

 7. 7.
   
    大森林里长着1000…棵树。: In the large forest, there grew 1000…[measure-word] trees.

 8. 8.
   
    池塘里游着四…条鱼。: In the pond, there swam four …[measure-word] fish.

 9. 9.
   
    这位艺术家创作了十二…幅画。: The artist created twelve…[measure-word] paintings.

10. 10.
   
    夜空中，他们看到了1000…颗星星。: In the night sky, they saw 1000…[measure-word] stars.

We select these examples because preliminary testing indicated that at least larger models produce
the expected counter words when given them; they do not all have a correct answer per se. Thus,
unlike in the a/an and is/are cases, we cannot treat these as a behavioral evaluation of backward
planning ability. However, we can still analyze models’ circuits.

Thus, we compute attribution graphs for these examples, attributing back from the predicted
(measure) word. As in the a/an example, we find features that correspond to our intended word. For
example, planning features that fire on and upweight bird activate on example 5, while painting
features activate on example 9. However, analogues to say a/an features are often absent from these
circuits: while “say [any measure word]” features are common, “say [specific measure word]”
features are not. That is, while there are “say head [of cattle]” features that correspond to the
livestock measure word

头, not all measure words have these. How do these features contribute to model outputs?

We test this by running interventions, as in the couplets section of the main text. Specifically,
we run the model on a given target example, but downweight its planning features, while upweighting
features from another source example; we run these replacements for all source ×\times target
combinations. We aim to change the model’s output measure word to the measure word of the target
example. In addition to performing unconstrained interventions, we also perform direct-effects
interventions. These test for the presence of “say [specific measure word]” features that might be
hidden in transcoder errors: if direct-effect interventions fail, while full-effects experiments
succeed, we know that intervening features exist in downstream MLPs, even if the transcoders miss
them.


Figure 23: The effectiveness of replacement interventions, measured by the percent of cases where
the intervention induced to model to output the expected the measure word. Left: the expected
measure word is considered to be the measure word that the model output on the target example. 
Right: the expected measure word is considered to be the ground truth measure word from the list
above—even if the model failed to output it originally. Models’ accuracies with respect to the
original ground truth are shown in green.

Our results indicate that this intervention is relatively successful. Figure 23 (left) shows the
proportion of examples in which performing the intervention successfully changed the word into the
expected measure word, i.e. the word that the model originally output on the target example.
Performance generally increases with scale, increasing from 20% match with the expected measure
word to 52.2%. By contrast, direct-effects interventions produce effects around half the size. When
we use the ground-truth measure word as our expected measure word (Figure 23, right), smaller
models perform worse, direct effects interventions grow less effective and the scaling trend
becomes more obvious.

We conclude that the planning nodes do also control the measure word and noun output. However, we
note that the direct-effects interventions have moderate effects, varying by measure word. We
hypothesize that this is because some Chinese measure words have semantics that closely align with
their corresponding noun; for such examples, the planning features, along with “say [any measure
word]” features suffices to upweight the measure word.

Appendix L Steering on A-An Planning Features

In this section, we provide additional evidence that planning features, such as those in the a/an
experiments, do not directly cause the upweighting of said indefinite articles. To do so, we take
the same approach in Section 5.4 to identify planning features to steer on. We then use them to
steer models on the TinyStories dataset. We then check for the presence of the planned word, and
for the presence of a/an before it. Our results (Figure 24) indicate that while steering is
effective at eliciting the desired word, this does not entail producing a/an.


Figure 24: Results of steering on planning features from the a/an task. For each model, we plot the
proportion of examples where the model produces the planned word (blue) and the proportion where
the model produces a or an, followed by the planned word. Models often produce the planned word
when steered, but less often produce the article in front of it.

Appendix M What are nascent circuits?

We find that Qwen-3 4B and 8B have nascent circuits for a/an and is/are, leading them to achieve
middling recall of the minority classes of those tasks. But what does it mean for circuits to be
nascent, or not fully formed? There are a few points of potential breakage in the circuit:

  • •
   
    Planning Features The models could lack planning features, or fail to activate them
    sufficiently.

  • •
   
    Downstream Connections The models could lack connections from planning features to downstream
    features upweighting a/an or is/are


Figure 25: Planning feature counts on an examples, by model and correctness. The smallest models
have few planning features overall, while the largest has relatively many in both the correct and
incorrect cases. In the 4B and 8B parameter models (with nascent circuits), there is a large gap
between the number of planning features active in correct and incorrect cases..

We investigate the first hypothesis in the a/an task, by counting the number of planning features
active on an examples, distinguishing cases where model outputs were correct and incorrect.
Plotting these (Figure 25) shows markedly different behaviors across model scale. The 0.6B and 1.7B
parameter models have very few active planning features overall. The 4B and 8B parameter models
have many active planning features in the correct case, but notably fewer in the incorrect case.
Finally, Qwen-3 (14B) has many planning features active in both cases, though slightly fewer are
active in incorrect cases.

This suggests that the failure of these nascent circuits is due at least in part to the models’
failure to adequately activate planning features.

Experimental support, please view the build logs for errors. Generated by L A T E xml [LOGO] .

Instructions for reporting errors

We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility
and mobile support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and
rendering, choose any of the methods listed below:

  • Click the "Report Issue" ( ) button, located in the page header.

Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.

Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and
reporting rendering errors we may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML
versions for all readers, because disability should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank
you for your continued support in championing open access for all.

Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML
maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.

We gratefully acknowledge support from our major funders, member institutions, , and all
contributors.
About · Help · Contact · Subscribe · Copyright · Privacy · Accessibility · Operational Status
(opens in new tab)
Major funding support from
Simons Foundation Simons Foundation International Schmidt Sciences
 
